1
A Novel Geometric Model of Natural Spirals
Based on Right Triangle Polygonal Modular Formations
Robert E. Grant1
, Talal Ghannam2
, Amanda Kennedy3
1
Strathspey Crown Holdings, Crown Sterling. Newport Beach, California, USA. 2,3Crown Sterling, Newport Beach, California, USA.
We propose a novel class of spirals that are based on perfect polygonal formations. The spirals are defined by a fractal
of right triangles that delineate their geometry and determine their progression rates and modes. We show how these
spirals match naturally occurring ones, including hurricanes and galaxies, much better than already proposed models,
allowing for more accurate categorization of these phenomena and better prediction of their physical properties.
I. INTRODUCTION
The universe is defined by various patterns and forms,
with spirals being the dominant among them,
observed in the faraway galaxies as well as in
hurricanes and tornados, plants and trees, water flow,
DNA, etc. They are the archetypical patterns upon
which most types of matter, living and nonliving,
organize themselves. Therefore, understanding the
physical properties of these fundamental shapes and
the mechanisms by which they form is essential to our
understanding of the whole universe, on the
macroscopic level as well as on the microscopic one.
The first approach scientists usually take to
understand a phenomenon is by formulating it via an
appropriate mathematical model. The general
research on the topic has concentrated mainly on the
hyperbolic logarithmic spiral (HLS)1
, where the Euler
number e (2.718…) works as the expansion factor.
Nevertheless, this approach does not produce
accurate models that can fit the observed forms of all
spirals unless it is adjusted by certain factors,
depending on the natural spiral being modeled.2,3 For
example, the equation ln(r - r0) = A1 + B1(θ) was
proposed as a good fit for some of the rain bands of
hurricanes.4
 As obvious, many parameters must be
included in order to force the logarithmic spiral to
match the natural one. And still, the resemblance
varies from good to not that close.
Accurately categorizing natural spirals based on
specific mathematical and geometrical models offers
many benefits. For example, there has been an
awareness of the relationship between spirals shapes
and their physical properties for over five decades.5
Thus, we can predict the intensity of a specific
hurricane simply by matching its radar images to a
known model that is already associated with a specific
category.
Nature is intrinsically simple, and the triangle is the
simplest of all geometrical shapes and also the most
stable among them. Moreover, any geometric form
can be deconstructed into a matrix of triangles of
different shapes and sizes, as in finite element
analysis. The right triangle is of particular
significance due to the Pythagorean relationship that
governs its sides, with the sum of the square of the
two perpendicular sides equal to the square of the
third one, the hypotenuse. Therefore, the right
triangle is the most suitable shape to be used in
constructing spirals, mathematically as well as
geometrically.
Using right triangles, we were able to create spiraling
forms that fit most natural spirals much better than
any other model proposed in the literature. This we
achieved without needing an ample parameter space
that requires adjustment depending on the modeled
2
spiral. Moreover, we will show that there is a direct
correlation between the number of triangles forming
one complete round of the spiral (which we call the
mod) and the specific properties of the natural spirals
that match it.
Below are the definitions of some of the terms used
throughout the paper:
Rain bands: The spiral-like structure of clouds in
which heavy rainfall resides.
Regular polygon: a shape with the exact same side
lengths, not to be confused with a regular polygon.
Mod: The number of right triangles formed from
intersecting a perfect polygon at all its vertices and
midpoints.
II. Triangular Spiral: Math and Geometry
Forming spirals from right triangles is not a new
concept. The spiral of Theodorus is one such example
where right triangles, all having base lengths of 1 unit,
can be stacked one next to the other to create a
spiraling behavior, as shown below.
Figure 1: The spiral of Theodorus, made of a matrix of right
triangles with the outer base of all triangles having a length of 1
unit.
Through our research, we were able to build other
types of spirals by juxtaposing right triangles such
that each triangle is constrained by the base of the
previous one. The emerging shapes delineate perfect
regular polygonal geometry, such as squares,
pentagons, hexagons, etc.
Consider the spiral below, which requires 12 triangles
for each round. Note how the base of each triangle
constrains the dimension of the next by defining its
height.
Figure 2: A new form of spirals made from right triangles
juxtaposed such that the base of the previous triangle work as the
height of the next one.
The triangles that create these triangular spirals have
similar proportions, varying in scale only. For the
above specific example, the dimensions have ratios of
[1:√3:2], as shown below. Thus, if we start from a
triangle of [1, √3, 2] units, the next one will have a
hypotenuse of 4/√3, and so on.
1
2
√3
Figure 3: The right triangle that forms the base of the 12-turns
spiral has the dimensions of [1:2:√3].
3
The value √(4/3) = 1.1547... is the ratio of the
hypotenuse to the height, which governs how each
new triangle grows from the previous one. It acts as a
log base (similar to e) and accounts for the expansion
rate around a circle. The growth rate of 1.1547… is
equal to 1/cos(30°) = 1.1547…, and for this specific
angle, the spiral is formed based on a hexagonal
structure, as shown below. Generally, the number of
twists or turns (the mod) a triangular spiral performs
is twice the number of sides of the polygon it
delineates. So for a specific polygonal geometry of nsides, the mod is 2n. Therefore, the above-mentioned
spiral is mod(12).
Figure 4: The spiral defined by a hexagon performs 12 twists for
each 360° complete turn; thus, it is a mod(12) triangular spiral.
Another spiral emerges from a pentagonal structure,
as shown below. The triangles that form this spiral
have proportions [1:1.37639:1.7013], and therefore,
each triangle grows from the previous one by the ratio
of 1.7013…/1.37639… = 1/cos(36°) = 1.23606…
The number of twists it takes to make one full round
is 2×5 = 10, and this is a mod(10) spiral.
A chart containing measurements of the logarithmic
base values for different spirals corresponding to
polygons having sides' lengths of 3 up to 109 can be
found in the Appendix. (The GeoGebra online
application was used to generate each spiral to 17
digits accuracy.)
Figure 5: A pentagonal spiral emerging from connecting the tip
of each right triangle to its predecessor.
The higher the expansion base values, the lower the
number of right triangles per loop (lower mod
number), and consequently, the less the circularity of
the spiral.
Figure 6: The square, a spiral of mod(8), displays a spiral pitch
with an expansion value of 1.414213562. The spiral is visibly less
circular compared to higher mod ones.
4
Figure 7: A heptagon spiral, mod(14), displays a spiral with a base
value of 1.109916264. The higher the mod number, the more
circular the spiral becomes.
Mathematically, spirals are best described through
spherical or cylindrical coordinates. Each point on the
spiral is determined by its distance r from the origin
as a function of the angle φ, or the ranking of the
triangle n, as shown below. In our case, the radial
distances coincide with the points where the extended
bases intersect the hypotenuses, e.g., a, r1, r2, etc.
φ0
φ0
a
r2
r3
n1
n2
n3
r1
φ
n0
Figure 8: The triangular spiral is defined by n, the number of
triangles, and φ0, the angle that defines each right triangle.
As the triangles of the above spirals are all similar,
differing only in scale, the internal angle φ0 is always
the same for any given spiral, differing depending on
the triangles used (which determines the mod) and is
restricted by the condition φ0 < 90° (as we can't have
two 90° in one triangle). This is different from the
Theodorus spiral, for example, as even though the
latter is also made from right tringles, they are all
different from each other, with different internal
angles.
Thus, we can describe the radial coordinate of a
triangular spiral as:
r(n) = a/cos(φ0)
n
Where n is the order of the triangle in the sequence,
having the discrete values [0, 1, 2, 3, …], and a is the
height of the first right triangle, the spiral seed. So,
for n = 0, r is equal to a. Of course, φn, the full angle
of rn is related to φ0 through φn = n.φ0; therefore, we
can rewrite the above relationship as:
r(φ) = a/cos(φ0)
(φ/φ0)
From here, we can find a formula for φ by taking the
natural log of both sides, which yields:
φ = k×ln(a/r)
Where k is a constant that depends on the triangles
used in making up the spiral, defined as φ0/ln(cos(φ0).
The curvature of the spiral is defined by the polar
slope angle, which measures the angle that a tangent
line to the spiral at a certain point makes with the
tangent line to a circle centered at the spiral's center,
at that same point, as shown below.
Mathematically, the polar angle (α) is calculated
using the formula: tan(α) = r′/r, where r′ is the
derivative of r with respect to it argument. So, for r(n)
= a/cos(φ0)
n
, the polar angle will be:
tan(α) =[d/dn(a/cos(φ0)
n
]/[a/cos(φ0)
n
] →
tan(α) = -ln[cos(φ0)]
5
α
Figure 9: The polar slope angle is defined as the angle between
the tangent of the spiral at a certain point and the circle that runs
through the same point and is centered at the spiral origin.
As illustrated by the plot below, the polar slope angle
diverges as we approach the critical value of φ0 = π/2.
Figure 10: Polar slope angle vs. the internal angle φ0. The slope
diverges as the angle approaches π/2.
The growth rate of the the radius of the spiral between
points n and n+1 is:
Δr = a/cos(φ0)
n+1 - a/cos(φ0)
n →
Δr = a[(1-cos(φ0))/ cos(φ0)
n+1].
As shown below, for φ0 = π/6, Δr increase in an
almost linear fashion with n. however, for larger
angles, the rate of increase becomes nonlinear,
reaching exponential values for values of φ0 around
40°.
Figure 11: The radial difference Δr between successive triangles
as a function of n (a = 1), and for two different angles φ0 = π/6
(dashed line) and φ0 = π/4 (dotted line).
Figure 12: The radial difference diverges at around φ0 = 7π/32 ≈
40° (this is for n = 10).
Figure 13: For large values of φ0, the radial difference diverges
quickly, as shown above for triangles having φ0 = 63° and for n =
[0, 1, 2].
6
III. Triangular Spirals in Nature
We overlay triangular spirals on top of images
released by NASA, National Geographic, and other
scientific and educational organizations. The images
are for galaxies, hurricanes, shells, etc. Apart from the
opacity, no further editing or distorting of the images
has been made.
The overlaying reveals an excellent match with the
natural formations. For example, the nautilus shell
has always been considered as a perfect example of
the golden spiral working in nature (the golden spiral
is defined by the irrational golden mean Φ = 1.618…).
Nevertheless, the triangular spiral of mod(16) seems
to fit the shell more perfectly than the golden spiral
does, as shown below. Note the perfect match with
the first three rounds of the shell. The shell then
slightly deviates from the triangular spiral, but we
believe as the nautilus gets older, its shell will again
achieve a perfect matching. And not only does the
nautilus' spiral match that of the mod(16), but also
there are 16 chambers inside the shell for each turn,
matching up exactly with the triangles' hypotenuses.
Figure 14: Overlaying a triangular spiral of mod(16) over a
nautilus shell reveals a perfect matching (better than a golden
spiral would do).
In the figure below, we compare a mod(8) spiral that
is based on square polygonal geometry to the
hurricane Sally of 2020, having a category of two.
Note the perfect matching between the two spirals.
Figure 15: Hurricane Sally (category 2), whose maximum wind
speed reached about 105 mph, is identified as a mod(8) spiral.
Another example is between hurricane Odile (2014)
of category four and the mod(16) spiral.
Figure 16: Hurricane Odile, category 4, matching perfectly with
a triangular spiral of mod(16).
7
Hurricane Katrina of 2005 was a category five. It
matches perfectly with a mod(18) spiral.
Figure 17: Hurricane Katrina. Category 5, matching a spiral of
mod(18).
As demonstrated by these images, there seems to be a
direct correlation between the category or the strength
of the hurricane and the mod of the matching
triangular spiral; the stronger the hurricane, the higher
the mod. Higher mod numbers indicate a higher
number of right triangles involved in creating the
spiral, which is reflected by the increase in the
number of sides of its respective overall polygonal
geometry.
The outer space is filled with spiral-like structures as
well, mainly galaxies. Galactic spiral arms are made
up of different materials, including space dust, gas,
celestial bodies such as stars, planets, etc. The
gravitational interaction between the stars in the spiral
arm, along with the effect of the dark matter that
surrounds them, controls their angular momentum
and hence their spirality.6

Galactic spirals have the biggest share of spiral-model
analysis. The images below illustrate many types of
spiral galaxies overlayed with their matching
triangular spirals, along with their respective mods.
Figure 18: Galaxy NGC 1566 identified as a mod(14) spiral.
Figure 19: Galaxy M77 identified as a mod(8) spiral.
Galaxies with higher central mass concentrations are
predicted to have more tightly wound spiral arms.7
Furthermore, the greater the speed and the heavier the
density, the more mods there are in the matching
triangular spiral. The more mods, the tighter the
8
spirals would wind, which creates a more circular
shape.
Figure 20: Another example of perfect matching between celestial
galaxies and triangular spirals of different mods.
This perfect correlation allows for better
categorization and prediction of the properties of the
numerous spiraling formations manifested in the
natural world. It also hints at a possible fundamental
role the right triangular geometry plays in forming the
physical universe, which is the subject of ongoing
research by the authors.
IV. Conclusion
A novel class of triangular spirals is proposed, and
their geometrical and mathematical properties are
analyzed. These new forms are shown to match many
natural spiraling phenomena much better than any
previously proposed model. Even though this study
does not explain how the natural spirals are originally
formed; however, distinct connections have been
observed, where physical attributes of the natural
spirals can be deduced based on the mods of their
matching triangular spirals. An in-depth study is
currently being conducted to gain a deeper insight
into right triangles and how their geometry could help
us better understand other fundamental physical
phenomena.
9
Appendix
A chart containing all necessary measurements of the
progression base values for shapes with size three up
until 109.

10
References
[1] Boris S. Yurchak. Description of cloud-rain bands
in a tropical cyclone by a hyperbolic-logarithmic
spiral. Russian Meteorology and Hydrology (2007).
[2] M. S. Seigar, P. A. James. The structure of spiral
galaxies - I Near-infrared properties of bulges, discs,
and bars. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, Volume 299, issue 3 (1998).
[3] M. C. Parker and C. Jeynes. Maximum entropy
(most likely) double helical and double logarithmic
spiral trajectories in space-time. Scientific Reports,
Volume 9 (2019).
[4] H. V. Senn, H. W. Hiser, and R. C. Bourret.
Studies of hurricane spiral bands as observed on
radar. National Hurricane Research Project (1957).
[5] Boris Yurchak. The Use of a Spiral Band Model
to Estimate Tropical Cyclone Intensity. Current
Topics in Tropical Cyclone Research (2019)
[6] Junichi Baba, Takayuki R. Saitoh, and Keiichi
Wada. Dynamics of non-steady spiral arms in disk
galaxies. The Astrophysical Journal, Volume
763, number 1 (2013).
[7] Marc S. Seigar, James S. Bullock, Aaron J. Barth,
and Luis C. Ho. Constraining dark matter halo
profiles and galaxy formation models using spiral arm
morphology. The Astrophysical Journal, Volume
645, Number 2 (2006). 