1
The Wave Theory of Numbers
Robert E. Grant1
, Talal Ghannam2
1Strathspey Crown Holdings, Crown Sterling. Newport Beach, California, USA.
2Crown Sterling, Newport Beach, California, USA.
Abstract
The concept of waves is very fundamental to classical and modern physics alike, being essential in describing light, sound, and
elementary particles, among many other phenomena. In this paper, we show that the wave/particle duality is a phenomenon
manifested not only in the physical world and the mathematics that describes it but also in the simple numbers that form the basic
matrix upon which most of our sciences rest. We will also show how this wave-based approach to numbers could be essential to
our understanding of the mathematical and physical constants that govern the physical laws as well as the natural elements emerging
from them.
I. INTRODUCTION
Waves are one of the most studied natural
phenomena and in most scientific fields. This is
due to their ubiquitous presence everywhere in
the world around us, from the macrocosmic to the
microcosmic levels.
The most common form of waves is the one
observed on water surfaces, mostly due to the
mechanical forces that winds exert on surfaces
like seas, lakes, ponds, etc. Simply drop a stone
into still water and you will generate circular
waves that expand outwardly from the center
(where the stone was dropped).
Sound also propagates in the form of waves that
travel by compression and expansion of air
molecules1
.
Waves emanating from two or more sources
interfere with each other creating a pattern of
alternating light and dark regions, being the result
of the constructive and destructive interference
between the troughs and crests of the waves.
When troughs meet troughs (or crests meet
crests) they add up constructively. When a trough
and crest meet they add up destructively,
canceling each other out.
This pattern is one of the main proofs of the
wave-like nature of light, as demonstrated by
Young’s famous double-slit experiment2
.
In fact, interference patterns are the hallmark of
waves propagation and one of the most important
tools used by scientists allowing them to measure
important qualities such as the frequencies of the
interfered waves, the speeds of their sources, the
distances of these sources, among many other
properties of interest.
Fig.1: A sketch by Thomas Young illustrating light
diffraction-interference pattern.
At the beginning of the 20th century, it became
evident that the classical mathematical models
used in physics for centuries are inadequate to
explain the new observations and discoveries the
experimental physicists were making.
The breakthrough came in 1913 when Niels Bohr,
a Danish physicist, suggested a novel way to look
at the orbits of the electron around the proton in
the hydrogen atom; instead of a continuum of
possible energy states, only discrete or quantized
ones are allowed3
. The success of his model in
predicting the atomic spectrum of the hydrogen
2
atom was the spark that ignited the quantum
mechanics revolution.
Another breakthrough came from the French
physicist Louis De Broglie who suggested that
particles may also behave like waves inside the
atoms; exhibiting wavelengths and frequencies
just like sound and light do4
.
This theory explained many observations and
opened the door into an exciting new reality that
is, however, not easy to comprehend nor to
visualize5
.
The wave-particle duality was confirmed in 1927
when a different type of Young’s double-slit
experiment was performed, the DavissonGermer6
 experiment, where interference
diffraction patterns were observed from a stream
of electrons (instead of light.)
Previously, in 1905, Albert Einstein had
suggested in his photo-electric paper7
 that light is
made of discrete wave packets of energy called
photons. Thus, light also behaves either like a
wave or as a point-like entity, depending on the
observation or the experiment performed.
Consequently, the term particle/wave duality was
coined to describe this mysterious phenomenon.
But where does this duality come from? And to
what level do its ramifications reach? We
definitely can’t feel it in our macrocosmic level.
Maybe we need to go to smaller levels to detect
its origin, smaller even than the fundamental
particles themselves.
There are many levels below that of the
elementary particles. For example, protons and
neutrons are believed to be made of even smaller
entities called quarks, three of them in each8
. And
in String Theory9
, everything, including quarks,
is supposed to be made of tiny vibrating strings,
which is the most fundamental level physicist
have theorized.
But there is still a more fundamental level; that of
the physical and mathematical constants which
govern space and natural forces, such as Pi, Euler
number, fine structure constant, to mention a few.
II. THE PARTICLE-ASPECT OF
NUMBERS
The idea behind atoms goes way back to the 5th
century BC, where the Greek philosopher
Leucippus10 thought matter to be continuously
devisable until one reaches a point where it
cannot be divided anymore: the size of atoms.
By the beginning of the twentieth century, atoms
were found to be made of even smaller entities,
called elementary particles, mainly the electron,
the proton, and the neutron.
Consequently the field of quantum mechanics
emerged whereby physicists had a mathematical
framework able to describe these particles and
their interactions.
By assigning specific numbers to these particles,
called Quantum Numbers11, physicists were able
to describe their quantum states. These quantum
numbers are conserved and dictate how the
particles behave and whether a certain reaction is
allowed or not.
For example, in the beta-decay, where a neutron
decays into a proton, an electron, and an
antineutrino, the quantum charge number should
be conserved before and after the interaction:
𝑛
଴
 → 𝑝
ା + 𝑒
ି + 𝜐 .
And we see that 0 = 1 – 1 + 0, as the proton is
considered positive, the electron negative, and the
antineutrino carries no charge, just like the
neutron.
There are many other qualities assigned to
particles, such as angular momentum, principle
quantum number, spin, etc. and most of them are
described by sets of integers either discrete (i.e.
similar to [-1, 0, 1] as in the charge number for
example) or continuous, as in the principle
quantum number [1, 2, 3...]
But we are not constrained to use these specific
numbers only. We can use numbers from 1 to 9
to describe the elementary particles and their
3
behaviors, requiring the implementation of the
digital root math12
.
For example, if we assign particles the numbers
shown in the table below, we find that these
numbers also satisfy the beta-decay, and any
elementary reaction, as follows: 1 = 2 + 3 +5 = 10
and the digital root of 10 = 1.
PARTICLE ANTI-PARTICLE
𝒏
𝟎 → 𝟏 𝑛
଴ → 8
𝒑
ା → 𝟐 𝑝
ି → 7
𝒆
ି → 𝟑 𝑒
ା → 6
𝝊 → 𝟐 𝜐 → 2
The numbers assignment is chosen such that each
particle, when added to its antiparticle, results in
the number 9, which is equivalent to 0 in the
digital root math. However, number 9 is not 0 or
nothingness, and this is where the two systems
differ; as when a particle and antiparticle unite,
they annihilate each other in a great burst of
energy. This is exactly what number 9 is telling
us here: that the unification results in energy, not
0 (as the numbers 1 and -1 produce).
Therefore numbers can enact the role of particles
perfectly (and energy, as in number 9). They even
dictate how particles interact and behave. In a
sense, it is from the properties of numbers that the
physical reality inherits its fundamental laws.
III. THE WAVE ASPECT OF
NUMBERS
As illustrated above, particles and numbers are
different manifestations of the same point-like
aspects.
However, as we have shown above, this pointlike aspect is not the only one that particles
exhibit; they have a wave-like nature that is as
fundamental as the point-like one, described by
wave-equations, such as Schrödinger’s
equation11, interpreted as a probability density
spread over spacetime, communicating a physical
meaning only when squared.
There are two main types of numbers: integers
and non-integers (floats).
Integer numbers are exact, with no commas or
leftovers. So, an integer would be something like
1, 2, 3, 564, 9845603, etc.
By contrast, non-integer or float would be
something like 5.65, or 2.7182818…
For the case of floats, there are several types.
There are those that are rational, having few
numbers for their remainders or where the
remainder repeats indefinitely in a specific
pattern, like 1/7 = 0.142857142857…
And there are irrational numbers, being those
numbers where their remainders repeat in a
completely random fashion, but still are the
solution of some algebraic equation, such as the
golden section Phi13
.
On the far extreme, we have transcendental
numbers, where their remainders repeat
indefinitely in a string of random digits. Unlike
transcendental numbers, however, they solve no
known algebraic equation, such as π or Euler
number e.
The ratio 1/7 is particularly interesting as it seems
to capture the essence of the wave. This is
because the repeated pattern of its remainder
[142857] mimics a wave when plotted
individually, and more so collectively, as shown
in figure (2) below.
Fig.2: The wave-like nature of the remainder of 1/7.
In fact, taking the inverse of numbers is the
simplest mathematical way to create repeated
patterns, for example, 1/6 = 0.16666…, or 1/273
= 0.00366300366300… etc.
Natural numbers [0, 1, 2, … ∞] only increase in
magnitude and, consequently, no wave-like
behavior is observed. However, looking at their
4
digital roots exposes a wave-pattern embedded
underneath.
So, when numbers from 1 to infinity are
distributed, let’s say within three columns, we
find that the digital roots of the numbers in each
column repeats indefinitely, as shown in the table
below.
NATURAL NUMBERS DIGITAL ROOT
1 2 3 1 2 3
4 5 6 4 5 6
7 8 9 7 8 9
10 11 12 1 2 3
13 14 15 4 5 6
16 17 18 7 8 9
… … … … … …
The 1st column’s digital root repeats in the
sequence [1, 4, 7]. This sequence resembles a
wave, just like 1/7 does. It’s the same for the other
two columns made up of [2, 5, 8] and [3, 6, 9].
Therefore, in principle, numbers do observe some
form of a numerical wave-like pattern. We can
say that numbers carry certain frequencies, either
individually, as in their repeating remainders, or
collectively, as in their digital roots.
If this wave-like essence is related to the same
one we observe everywhere in nature, it should
also exhibit some of its properties. And there is
no property of waves more fundamental than
interference.
IV. NUMBERS’ INTERFERENCE AND
PATTERNS
One of the most basic interference patterns is the
one generated from two point-like sources
propagating circular waves. The emerging pattern
is similar to that of the two-slit experiment
(Figure 1) reproduced in greater detail below:
0 1 72 3 4 5 6 891011120 6 12 18 24Fig.3: (top) Interference pattern from two point-like sources.
(Middle) The same interference pattern magnified to
illustrate the 12-based fractal nature of the pattern. (Bottom)
Digital rendering of the interference pattern for a scale from
0 to 12.
From the above pattern, we notice that the waves’
interference creates periodic self-similar fractals
with intervals obeying multiples of 12, depending
on the level of the fractal. Moreover, the pattern
is built on doubling principles where each circle
encompasses an even number of smaller circles
inside it in a hierarchal fashion.
On closer inspection (Figure 4), we see that the
numerical wave matrix is scalable to numbers
from 1 to 10 as well as from to 100, or to 2000,
etc. For our case, we look at a range from 1 to 121
for reasons explained shortly.
The numbers on the horizontal axis are
referenced by their digital roots instead of their
original full values for better illustration of the
patterns of the wave matrix.
Note how the matrix is symmetric around number
60, especially when it comes to prime numbers.
Prime numbers are divisible by themselves and
number 1 only. The Fundamental Theorem14 of
Arithmetic states that any integer >1 can be
expressed as the unique product of two or more
primes. In this sense, prime numbers can be
considered the main block upon which all other
5
numbers are built, giving them a special status
among the rest.
Fig.4: An illustration of the wave matrix generated from
two-point-like interfering sources and for a scale between 0
and 121, along with prime and Quasi-prime symmetry,
angular references, and musical notes correspondences.
(Please refer to Appendix A for a more detailed explanation.)
So, starting with number 60, the two numbers
bounding it (59 and 61) are both prime numbers.
Going further to numbers 54 and 66, we find
another symmetry emerging with 53 and 67 being
primes and 55 and 65 not. (We label these nonprime numbers Quasi Primes, being the product
of prime numbers that are ≥ 5, thus excluding 2
and 3. Please refer to reference 15 for more
information on these numbers15.)
Numbers 47 and 49 to the left skip their matching
pair and match up instead with the next pair of 77
and 79, while 71 and 73, both prime, match up
with 41 and 43, also primes. These four pairs
form an offset that creates a kind of momentum
around number 60.
Further out, we get the symmetry back with pairs
35 and 37 matching up with 83 and 85.
When we reach numbers 30 on the left and 90 on
the right, we lose our reflection symmetry for the
pairs [29, 31] and [89, 91]. This is because, at 90
we have reached the fractal limit of our 9-base
system, starting with 9, then 90, then 900, etc.
Therefore, the break in symmetry here indicates
the end of one cycle and the beginning of another.
(We are working in a 9-based system not a 10-
based one because 10 is reducible to 1 in the
digital root math, and hence we have 9 numbers
only, from 1 to 9.)
One other cycle is at number 24, where twin
primes appearance on both sides of numbers that
are multiples of 6 breaks and the first quasi-prime
number appears, being number 25.
At 114 we get another break of symmetry, paving
the way for the appearance of the first quasiprime pair of [119, 121] and with the cycle
finishing at 120, as in a full octave.
With the 12-based fractal of the wave matrix, we
can superimpose the 12 notes of the octave on the
pattern as if the interference is generated by
sound waves, as shown in figure (4) above.
We used the notes of the major 5th octave with the
note A5 tuned to the standard pitch of 432Hz. This
is because by using this tuning value, we get a
perfect correspondence between the angular
reference of the notes’ and the internal angles of
specific polygons as explained in detail in
reference 16.
Therefore the wave interference pattern is a
unifying matrix where numbers, as well as
geometry and sound, can all be manifested and
expressed, enabling us, in return, to find new
connections between these various disciplines,
from music to the fundamental elements of
nature.
V. WAVE INTERFERENCE AND THE
EMERGENCE OF FUNDAMENTAL
CONSTANTS
The geometry of the wave matrix is essentially a
numbering or a measuring system which
determines the scale at which the physical
qualities that emanates from these waves work at.
For example, if we to consider these waves of
electromagnetic nature, emanating from the
fluctuation of the zero-point energy17, then their
interference pattern would set the scale that
controls many physical laws and qualities, such
as the speed of light. In another non-vacuum
medium, the scale will change depending on the
6
structure of the medium and the speed of light
will change accordingly.
We can also think of each point on the wave
matrix as an individual number-source generating
its own propagating numerical waves. This logic
is synonymous with the Huygens–Fresnel
Principle18 which is very powerful in explaining
many properties of light that are not explainable
using the single source model alone.
Therefore, mathematical constants, such as π or
e, can be decomposed into specific integers plus
a wave. For example, the constant π = 3.14592…
is partitioned into 3, representing the particle
aspect of the number or its amplitude, plus a
remainder of 0.141592…
To make the concept more comprehensible, we
use the approximate ratio of 22/7 = 3.142857…
which is equivalent to 3 (amplitude) + 1/7
(phase). The same logic applies to Euler number
e = 2.718… which can be expressed as 19/7 =
2.714285… = 2 + 5/7, with 2 being the amplitude
and 5/7 being the phase.
Fig.5: Number π expressed in a wave/particle fashion; the
sum of an integer amplitude of 3 and a phase of 1/7.
In this respect, each number on the wave matrix
form a seed or a kernel around which
mathematical and physical constants grow
through the addition of a phase.
By deducing the mechanism through which the
phases are generated, we can start predicting the
values of other constants that are not yet
identified. This is being investigated at the
moment and will be discussed in the next paper.
The above reasoning invites a more geometrical
approach to the mathematical and physical
constants, being natural separations of the waves.
For example, number π emanates from the waveseparation of unity in the ratios of 3 and 4 as
illustrated in the image below to the left. The
remainder can be generated from the same
process; endless doubling or separation of the
circular waves. And so is for the rest of the
mathematical constants; emerging from the
overlapping or separation of propagating waves.
Fig.6: Mathematical constants represented as doubling of
waves/circles: for π (left), and for the standard tuning of
432Hz (right).
This is a powerful representation that transforms
the abstract numerical constants into more
comprehensible forms having unique wave-like
signatures. This could very well be how these
constants are communicated to the universe as
well as the mechanism by which it governs its
physical laws
VI. THE PERIODIC WAVE OF
ELEMENTS
The natural elements comprising our universe are
listed in a linear fashion in the Periodic Table of
Elements, first introduced by the Russian chemist
Dmitri Mendeleev in 1869. This table of 14-18
columns or families categorize the elements
based on their atomic number (the number of
protons in the nucleus) and their chemical
properties.
Applying the wave theory to the numerical
references of the elements (i.e. their atomic
numbers) will separate these elements into their
respective families more naturally than the linear
method does.
7
As shown in figure (7) below, we start with
hydrogen, the simplest element, forming the first
wave/circle. (For better visualization, please refer
to Appendix B.)
Hydrogen initiates the binary doubling of the first
wave into 2 smaller ones, followed by 4 and then
8. These 8 circles are superimposed sine/cosine
waves with one wave corresponding to the
elements from He to Ne, while the other
corresponding to elements from Ne to Ar. (Some
elements appear on both sides of the wave matrix
because it is a fractal configuration; when one
cycle finishes, an exactly similar one starts.)
Fig.7: The wave-based table of elements along with their
respective families (shaded areas) and their musical
notes/geometry correspondences. (Please refer to Appendix
B for a more detailed explanation.)
By continuing the octave doubling, elements line
up perfectly in a manner that reflects their
respective families, such as Metals, Lanthanoids,
Acteonids, etc. with noble gases positioning
themselves on both sides of the wave matrix,
being the chemically inert members of the
elements. The more we move closer toward the
center or the peak of the wave the more active and
isotopic the elements become.
Next comes carbon whose family obeys the
following sequence: Si, Ge, Sn, and finally Pb.
Each element is positioned at a specific point or
node that is determined by the interference of two
waves. These waves emanate from the doubling
of the previous one, representing the preceding
element that initiates the doubling and the
emergence of the next octave elements, and so on.
Recalling how the wave matrix corresponded to
musical notes and geometry, we can therefore
associate each element with a specific frequency
and shape.
So for carbon, it corresponds to note C# of 540Hz
as well as to the hexagon, which is a very
appropriate shape as carbon chains usually take
the form of hexagons in organic materials.
The correspondences of the rest of the elements
are illustrated in Appendix B.
A consequence of the above wave-doubling
configuration concerns the counter-intuitive
conclusion of missing elements on the hydrogen
level (or even above this level) such that when
doubled, will generate the next octave of the
carbon level.
By following this logic to its narrowing
conclusion, 19 extra elements (3 noble gases, 8
standard elements, and 8 isotopes) need to be
added to the already known 118 of them, totaling
to 137, the same number that Richard Feynman,
the famous American physicist, already
suggested19 for the total number of elements (and
also a well-known prime value encoding the finestructure constant.)
Whatever the nature of these suggested new
elements may be, if any, the wave-based
configuration introduces a novel perspective to
the elements and their families that may lead to a
better understanding of their numerical
construction as well as their geometrical and
acoustic quintessence.
IV. CONCLUSION
Integrating the wave/particle aspect with integers
and their fractions creates a novel and holistic
approach to the physical world.
8
Treating numbers as natural wave generators, as
well as separators, sets a scale which extends our
reach into the most fundamental levels of many
branches of science and thus provides us with the
necessary knowledge to fathom the intricate
relationships between these branches and to
discover some of their hidden peculiarities.
APPENDIX
A- Larger rendering of Figure (4) with
further explanation.
On the main horizontal axis of the wave
interference matrix, we find the digital roots of
numbers from 1 to 121. listed on top of them
primes and Quasi-primes numbers positioned in a
symmetrical pattern around 60 as explained
above. (Number 60 can also be 6, 0.6 or 600, etc.
as the whole pattern is of fractal nature.) Above
the level of prime numbers, we have numbers’
angular references as a fraction of 360◦
 and 432◦
.
So, above 60 we have 0.6×360◦
 = 216◦
 while 288◦
is just 0.8×360◦
 and so on. We use the decimal
fraction of the numbers as to maintain the degree
references within the 360◦ circle.
Notice how the cycle ends at 120, corresponding
to 432◦
, which is the same value for the
Pythagorean tuning.
The axis below the digital root numbers is the 1/x
reference of the numbers along with their degree
references. So, 1/6 = 0.166… and 0.166×432◦ =
72◦
, and so is the case for the rest of the numbers
(the 1/x analysis is essential for our next paper
where we discuss the emergence of the
fundamental constants from the wave matrix).
The top rows are reserved for the corresponding
12 musical notes and their degrees of reference.
B- Larger rendering of Figure (7) with an
explanation.
The wave-based periodic table of elements
rests on the wave-doubling principle, with
each element initializing the doubling of the
wave, which in returns, produces more
elements that initiate more doubling and so
on. Each node corresponds to specific
elements along with a specific musical note
and geometry, as shown at the bottom of the
image.
The shaded areas represent the chemical
families of the elements, such as metals,
weak metal, lanthanoids, and actinoids.

9
References
[1] David R. Dowling. Revealing hidden
information with quadratic products of acoustic
field amplitudes. Phys. Rev. Fluids 3 (2018).
[2] Young, Thomas. Bakerian Lecture:
Experiments and calculations relative to physical
optics. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society. 94: 1–16 (1804).
[3] Niels Bohr. On the Constitution of Atoms and
Molecules. Niels Bohr, 1913-2013. Springer
(2013).
[4] P. Weinberger. Revisiting Louis de Broglie's
famous 1924 paper in the Philosophical
Magazine. Philosophical Magazine Letters
(2006).
[5] Feynman, R. QED: The Strange Theory of
Light and Matter. Penguin (1990).
[6] Davisson, C. J.; Germer, L. H. Reflection of
Electrons by a Crystal of Nickel. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America. 14 (4) (1928).
[7] Einstein, A. On a Heuristic Point of View
about the Creation and Conversion of Light.
Annalen der Physik 17 (1905).
[8] B. Povh, C. Scholz, K. Rith, and F. Zetsche.
Particles and Nuclei. Springer (2008).
[9] Michael B. Green, John H. Schwarz, Edward
Witten. Superstring Theory. Cambridge
University Press (2012).
[10] C.C.W. Taylor. The Atomists: Leucippus
and Democritus. Phoenix Presocractic Series
(2010).
[11] Eugen Merzbacher. Quantum Mechanics.
Wiley, 3rd edition, (1997).
[12] Talal Ghannam. The Mystery of Numbers:
Revealed through their Digital Root, 2nd Edition.
CreateSpace (2012).
10
[13] John Michell and Alan Brown. How the
world is made. Inner Traditions (2009).
[14] Lindemann, F. A. The Unique Factorization
of a Positive Integer. Quart. J. Math. 4 (1933).
[15] Robert E. Grant and Talal Ghannam.
Accurate and Infinite Prime Prediction from
Novel Quasi-Prime Analytical Methodology
(2019).
[16] Robert E. Grant and Talal Ghannam. Music:
The Unification of Sound, Numbers, and
Geometry (2019). (Awaiting Journal Aproval).
[17] Harold E. Puthoff. Source of Vacuum
Electromagnetic Zero-Point Energy. Physical
Review A 40(9):4857-4862 (1989).
[18] David A. B. Miller. Huygens's Wave
Propagation Principle Corrected. Optics Letters
16 (1991).
[19] Hans Eggenkamp. The Geochemistry of
Stable Chlorine and Bromine Isotopes. Springer
(2014). 