Citations · 41

ssc.spaceforce.mil
ssc.spaceforce.mil

1
ssc.spaceforce.mil
https://www.ssc.spaceforce.mil/Portals/3/Documents/PRESS%20RELEASES/PA%202613_Doc_%20Press%20Release_CASINO--PredaSAR%20Demo.pdf?ver=N_q_x63AjjxrQUPOtS2UIA%3D%3D

7
Space Test Experiments Platform 2.0 To Bolster USSF ...
May 1, 2025 — STEP 2.0 establishes a 10-year multi-award Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity (IDIQ) contract with a $237M ceiling to bolster spacecraft procurement ...Read more

23
U.S. Space Force forms a New Ground Management Agreement for MEO MWT Launch and Operations > Space Systems Command > Article Display
https://www.ssc.spaceforce.mil/Newsroom/Article-Display/Article/4438302/us-space-force-forms-a-new-ground-management-agreement-for-meo-mwt-launch-and-o

37
U.S. Space Force forms a New Ground Management Agreement for MEO MWT Launch and Operations > Space Systems Command > Article Display
Apr 9, 2024 — US Space Command and the Uruguayan Air Force signed a Space Situational Awareness information sharing agreement, Apr. 9, 2024.Read more

41
Space Systems Command Advances Antenna Services with ...
Nov 28, 2025 — Space Systems Command Advances Antenna Services with Successful TREx Transfer during JAM Demo. Published Nov. 28, 2025; By SSC Public Affairs ...Read more
nrl.navy.mil
nrl.navy.mil

2
NRL's Satellite Operations Service is Ready for the Space ...
Dec 9, 2025 — As of August 2025, NRL has transitioned TREx to SYD 85, where TREx will onboard additional satellite missions and serve the broader U.S. ...
sscspace.com
sscspace.com

3
Santiago Ground Station
The Santiago Ground Station is located north of Santiago in the metropolitan region of Chile, at 33º 08′ South latitude, 70º 40′ West longitude. The altitude of ...Read more
docs.aws.amazon.com
docs.aws.amazon.com

4
AWS Ground Station Locations
Finding the AWS region for a ground station location ; Punta Arenas 1, Punta Arenas, Chile, South America (São Paulo) ; Seoul 1, Seoul, South Korea, Asia Pacific ...Read more
leolabs.space
leolabs.space

5
leolabs.space
Apr 24, 2021 — Costa Rica on Thursday inaugurated a powerful radar capable of detecting objects as small as 2 centimeters transiting in low Earth orbit.Read more

33
leolabs.space
https://www.leolabs.space/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/LeoLabs-Announces-Costa-Rica-Space-Radar_Final_4222021.pdf
telespazio.com
telespazio.com

6
Telespazio inaugurates a new Teleport in Maricá and ...
Mar 1, 2023 — ... Teleport in Maricá is one of the most advanced satellite teleports in Latin America. ... “The new Marica Teleport is part of Telespazio ...Read more

35
Latin America
Telespazio has a widespread presence throughout the continent, counting with offices in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica and Peru.Read more

36
Telespazio Argentina: new premises for offices and ...
In addition, the company will soon transfer its satellite teleport, consisting of two 6.3 metre Master antennas and the related transmission and reception ...Read more
sam.gov
sam.gov

8
Transmit/Receive Enterprise (TREx) Service
The intent of this RFI is to gauge industry interest, capabilities, and relevant experience to support NRL personnel in performing the requirements stated in ...Read more
spaceforce.mil
spaceforce.mil

9
Space Systems Command geared to deliver swift ...
Apr 8, 2021 — The Command is set to officially stand up in summer 2021 once all required conditions are met to re-designate the Space and Missile Systems ...
darpa.mil
darpa.mil

10
Blackjack
DARPA's Blackjack program aims to develop and demonstrate the critical elements for a global high-speed network in low Earth orbit (LEO).Read more

15
Blackjack Focuses on Risk Reduction Flights and Simulations to Prepare for Full Demonstration
https://www.darpa.mil/news/2020/blackjack-risk-reduction

25
Blackjack Focuses on Risk Reduction Flights and Simulations to Prepare for Full Demonstration
Feb 24, 2021 — In late 2020, BCT and DARPA completed the bus's Critical Design Review at BCT's Satellite Constellation Factory in Lafayette, Colorado. BCT is ...

27
Blackjack Focuses on Risk Reduction Flights and Simulations to Prepare for Full Demonstration
May 20, 2021 — Edge Computing in Space. Loft Orbital of San Francisco received $750,000 under a Phase 2 contract through the Space and Missile Systems ...Read more
sda.mil
sda.mil

11
SDA Awards Contracts for the First Generation of the Transport Layer – Space Development Agency
https://www.sda.mil/sda-awards-contracts-for-the-first-generation-of-the-transport-layer/

12
SDA Announces Award for Tranche 1 Operations & Integration – Space Development Agency
https://www.sda.mil/sda-announces-award-for-tranche-1-operations-integration/

16
Space Development Agency Makes Awards for Tranche 1 Transport Layer – Space Development Agency
https://www.sda.mil/space-development-agency-makes-awards-for-tranche-1-transport-layer/

17
Space Development Agency Makes Awards for 28 Satellites to Build Tranche 1 Tracking Layer – Space Development Agency
https://www.sda.mil/space-development-agency-makes-awards-for-28-satellites-to-build-tranche-1-tracking-layer/
blogs.microsoft.com
blogs.microsoft.com

13
Analyzing data from space – the ultimate intelligent edge scenario - The Official Microsoft Blog
https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2019/09/17/analyzing-data-from-space-the-ultimate-intelligent-edge-scenario/
azure.microsoft.com
azure.microsoft.com

14
Ground processing with space data 5x faster with Azure | Microsoft Azure Blog
https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/blog/ground-processing-with-space-data-5x-faster-with-azure/

21
New Azure Space products enable digital resiliency and empower the industry | Microsoft Azure Blog
https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/blog/new-azure-space-products-enable-digital-resiliency-and-empower-the-industry/
gao.gov
gao.gov

18
gao.gov
https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-26-107085.pdf

28
Satellite Control Network: Updating Sustainment Plan Would Help Space Force Better Manage Future Efforts | U.S. GAO
https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-23-105505
airandspaceforces.com
airandspaceforces.com

19
Latest Small Business Tech Contracts Include Airborne AI ...
May 20, 2021 — Edge Computing in Space. Loft Orbital of San Francisco received $750,000 under a Phase 2 contract through the Space and Missile Systems ...Read more
ball.com
ball.com

20
Ball Aerospace, Loft Federal and Microsoft to Collaborate on
Apr 11, 2023 — Team consisting of Ball Aerospace, Loft Federal and Microsoft will deliver 10 experimental Space Development Agency payloads to orbit.Read more
businesswire.com
businesswire.com

22
Loft Orbital Federal, LLC Awarded NASA Task Order ...
Sep 2, 2025 — This task order is for the integration, launch and on-orbit operations of a mission supporting the Fault Tolerant RISC-V Flight Computer with ...Read more
stocktitan.net
stocktitan.net

24
Parsons wins $30M SDA contract for DARPA Blackjack mission | PSN Stock News
https://www.stocktitan.net/news/PSN/parsons-awarded-30m-contract-to-enhance-support-to-darpa-blackjack-eqz54h5cnpge.html
investor.caci.com
investor.caci.com

26
CACI | CACI Announces Successful Demonstration of Optical Intersatellite Links in Low Earth Orbit
https://investor.caci.com/news/news-details/2022/CACI-Announces-Successful-Demonstration-of-Optical-Intersatellite-Links-in-Low-Earth-Orbit/default.aspx
nasa.gov
nasa.gov

29
11.0 Ground Data Systems and Mission Operations
Ground station receive frequencies are mostly S and X band from a LEO/ GEO orbit ... KSAT Punta Arenas – Supports: S/X Band — Assets: 11.5m; KSAT Inuvik ...
esa.int
esa.int

30
ESA - Santiago station
The Santiago station terminals (AGO-7m,-9m,-11m,-12m) provide tracking capabilities in S-band (transmit & receive) and L- and X-band (receive); the station ...Read more
atlasspace.com
atlasspace.com

31
ATLAS Space Operations Extends Global Reach with Nine ...
Jul 31, 2019 — The new ground stations cover a range of polar and equatorial locations, including: Sodankyla, Finland; Cedar, Michigan; Harmon, Guam; Mojave, ...Read more
rbcsignals.com
rbcsignals.com

32
Global Ground Station Network |
Our global ground station network is designed to provide the satellite operator with multiple downlink points throughout their orbit.Read more
space.leonardo.com
space.leonardo.com

34
Telespazio satellite services - Space - Leonardo
Telespazio provides services for satellite launching and in-orbit control, and for the acquisition, processing and dissemination of satellite data.Read more
usaspending.gov
usaspending.gov

38
CONTRACT to SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGIES ...
View a summary page of this 2019 CONTRACT to SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGIES CORP. from the Department of Defense.
state.gov
state.gov

39
Brazil (19-1216.1) - Agreement on Technology Safeguards ...
Office of Treaty Affairs. Nonproliferation: Technology Safeguards. Signed at Washington March 18 and March 26, 2019; entered into force December 16, 2019.
spacecom.mil
spacecom.mil

40
USSPACECOM, CONIDA, and the Peruvian Air Force sign ...
Apr 18, 2023 — Gen. José Antonio García Morgan, CONIDA director, signed the agreement during Space Symposium 38 in Colorado Springs, Colo. USSPACECOM's Space ...Read more
Sources scanned · 1,012

breakingdefense.com
breakingdefense.com
DARPA Blackjack: Who'll Get Prized Satellite Tech, Air ...


Apr 22, 2019 — When Blackjack is proven successful, SMC is planning a transition of the architecture to a program called CASINO [Commercially Augmented Space ...Read more

Space Force to get NOAA antennas to supplement Satellite ...


Sep 22, 2025 — Space Systems Command is prototyping a Joint Antenna Marketplace to offload some of the SCN's burden and expand its capacity by using ...

'Major Milestone' As Allies Join SPACECOM's War Plan


May 21, 2020 — “This agreement will give Peru access to the highest quality satellite tracking data available to assist them with PerúSat-1 and its eventual ...Read more

France taps Loft Orbital to develop nation's first 'sovereign' ...


Jan 21, 2026 — The pricetag for the contract was not made public, and Loft senior marketing manager Sarah Preston told Breaking Defense that the €50 million ($ ...Read more

Loft Orbital's 'Rideshare' Sats: Take An Uber To Space


Jun 28, 2021 — That prospect, alone, certainly must tickle the fancies of many at DoD and Space Force. But while Loft is seriously interested in becoming a ...Read more

A Space Force dozen: SpaceX, ULA awarded contracts to ...


Jun 8, 2023 — The launches are being manifested under the National Security Space Launch (NSSL) Phase 2 program, managed by Space Systems Command. While ...

Blackjack Gets 2021 Budget Boost For Two Sats


Feb 18, 2020 — As colleague Sandra Erwin first reported, DARPA is in talks with Airbus, Blue Canyon Technologies and Telesat as potential providers of ...

Blackjack program Coverage


Project Blackjack: DARPA's test of satellite laser links delayed. A DARPA official couldn't confirm an exact launch date for the two Telesat birds.Read more

Space Force to solicit prototype proposals for midcourse ...


Nov 21, 2025 — Space Force to solicit prototype proposals for midcourse space-based missile interceptors. Other than stating that the call is for hit-to-kill ...Read more

DARPA's Blackjack Jumps Forward With Payload, Bus ...


Jun 15, 2020 — Lockheed Martin was chosen in late April as prime systems integrator for Phase 1 of the program. Pit Boss is being developed by SEAKR and SSCI.Read more

Space Force FORGEing ahead with missile warning ...


May 19, 2025 — The Space Force is moving to finally put in place the long-troubled next-generation ground system for its missile warning constellations.

SDA must be 'more realistic' about real risks in pricey ...


Jan 28, 2026 — As of July 2025, the report notes, SDA to awarded contracts worth $4.7 billion for 101 satellites in Tranche 0, 1 and 2 of the Tracking Layer to ...Read more

SDA awards four contracts worth $3.5B for next-gen missile ...


Dec 19, 2025 — SDA awards four contracts worth $3.5B for next-gen missile tracking satellites. Lockheed Martin, Rocket Lab USA, Northrop Grumman, and L3Harris ...Read more

SDA awards $1.8B in contracts for first operational data ...


Feb 28, 2022 — The Space Development Agency announced a total of $1.8 billion in contracts today to York Space Systems, Northrop Grumman and Lockheed Martin for its first set ...Read more

York scores SDA contract worth up to $200M for ...


Oct 6, 2022 — The Space Development Agency today announced that it has granted York Space Systems an Other Transaction Authority award worth up to $200 million.Read more

parsons.com
parsons.com
Parsons Awarded $30M Contract To Enhance Support ...


Dec 22, 2025 — Parsons Corporation secures a $30 million contract to enhance its contributions in the space sector with the Blackjack program.

ssc.spaceforce.mil
ssc.spaceforce.mil
Space Systems Command Advances Antenna Services with ...


Nov 28, 2025 — JAM is a secure, cloud-based marketplace that connects satellite operations centers with commercial and government antennas worldwide. By ...Read more

U.S. Space Force forms a New Ground Management ...


U.S. Space Force forms a New Ground Management Agreement for MEO MWT Launch and Operations. Published March 19, 2026; By SSC Public Affairs.Read more

Space Systems Command Advances Dynamic Satellite ...


May 12, 2025 — US Space Force (USSF) Space Systems Command (SSC) is advancing dynamic satellite operations through the Joint Antenna Marketplace program.Read more

Media Room - Space Systems Command


19 MAR 2026 - U.S. Space Force forms a New Ground Management Agreement for MEO MWT Launch and Operations 18 MAR 2026 - U.S. Space Force's EPS-R achieves ...Read more

News - Space Systems Command


Nov 28, 2025 — ... Joint Antenna Marketplace transfer of NRL's TREx Service from a ... connects satellite operations centers with commercial and government antennas ...Read more

Space Systems Command Awards $2.8B Contract to Deliver ...


Jul 3, 2025 — – The United States Space Force's Space Systems Command (SSC) awarded a $2.8B contract to The Boeing Company to build and deliver the first two ...Read more

U.S. Space Force's ATLAS System Achieves Operational ...


Sep 30, 2025 — The USSF announces the operational acceptance of ATLAS, marking a new era in Space Domain Awareness and setting a precedent for modern ...

Commercial Augmentation Space Reserve hits major ...


Apr 16, 2025 — These services could include: satellite communications; tactical surveillance, reconnaissance, and tracking; and space domain awareness. Surge ...Read more

Space Systems Command Media Release


Dec 6, 2021 — The Commercially Augmented Space Inter-Networked Operations (CASINO) program office, managed by SSC's Space Development Corps and a partner ...Read more

Space Test Experiments Platform 2.0 To Bolster USSF ...


May 1, 2025 — STEP 2.0 establishes a 10-year multi-award Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity (IDIQ) contract with a $237M ceiling to bolster spacecraft ...Read more

Newsroom - Tag Press Release - Page 2


Space Systems Command Advances Antenna Services with Successful TREx Transfer during JAM Demo ... operational prototype for the Space Force. Nov. 13, 2025. Space ...Read more

Newsroom - Page 4 - Space Systems Command


Space Systems Command Advances Antenna Services with Successful TREx Transfer during JAM Demo ... operational prototype for the Space Force. Oct. 27, 2025. Dual ...Read more

SSC stands up, Guetlein takes command


Aug 13, 2021 — US Space Force Lt. Gen. Michael A. Guetlein assumed command as the first commander of SSC, the second of three US Space Force field commands.Read more

Space Systems Command Unveils New Emblem Display


Nov 24, 2021 — The new Space Systems Command sign was revealed during an unveiling ceremony that took place at Los Angeles Air Force Base, California, Nov. 17, 2021.Read more

Space Systems Command Connects Heritage and Future ...


Aug 16, 2024 — Air Force leadership found Los Angeles County had the right combination of a technically adept workforce and military presence for a crash ...Read more

SSC Media - Space Systems Command


Space Systems Command successfully air launches seven satellites from Virgin Orbit's Boeing 747/LauncherOne for the US Space Force.Read more

Newsroom - Space Systems Command


The official website for the Space Systems Command.

Space Systems Command assigns 12 missions for National ...


Jun 8, 2023 — NEWS RELEASE. Space Systems Command assigns 12 missions for. National ... 90245-2808. Date: June 8, 2023. Contact: Media Relations Division.Read more

Space Systems Command Media Release


May 16, 2023 — Parsons will provide integrated ground and operations solutions for the resilient missile warning/missile tracking (MW/MT) missile track ...

Space Test Experiments Platform 2.0 To Bolster USSF ...


May 1, 2025 — STEP 2.0 establishes a 10-year multi-award Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity (IDIQ) contract with a $237M ceiling to bolster spacecraft procurement ...Read more

afcea-la.org
afcea-la.org
Space and Missile Systems Center


Oct 17, 2018 — • Title: Commercially Augmented Space Inter Networked Operations (CASINO). • Description: CASINO delivers a proliferated LEO layer of low ...Read more

Space and Missile Systems Center Range and Network ...


by CTR Rock Jr · 2018 · Cited by 4 — RBC: Remote Tracking Station Block Change. REG: Resilient Enterprise Ground. RCF: Range Communications Facility. AFSCN: Air Force Satellite Control Network.Read more

Space Systems Command's Commercial Space Office


Deliver effective, efficient & resilient capabilities to the warfighter quickly & affordably through partnering with the commercial space industry.Read more

executivebiz.com
executivebiz.com
Parsons Expands Role on DARPA Blackjack With $30M ...


Dec 23, 2025 — Parsons has secured a $30 million contract modification to expand its support for the Blackjack space mission, strengthening the company's ...

CACI Manufacturing Satellite Terminals for DARPA's ...


Jan 31, 2022 — The terminals link satellites to enable data transfers in orbit. Deliveries under the contract will occur over a timeline of several months.Read more

Parsons Lands SSC MEO Missile Tracking Architecture ...


May 1, 2023 — Parsons has received a potential six-year, $55 million contract to help Space Systems Command prepare and integrate a medium Earth orbit ...

sda.mil
sda.mil
US Military Places a Bet on LEO for Space Security


The Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC) in Los Angeles is a partner through its Commercial Augmented Space Inter-Networked Operations (CASINO) program ...Read more

SDA Awards Contracts for the First Generation ...


Aug 31, 2020 — Lockheed Martin Corporation, Littleton, Colo., is awarded a $187,542,461 firm-fixed-price contract for the Space Development Agency Transport ...Read more

Space Development Agency Makes Awards for Tranche 1 ...


Feb 28, 2022 — Date: February 28, 2022. SDA has awarded three protoftype agreements worth approximately $1.8 billion to establish the foundation for ...Read more

Space Development Agency Makes Awards for 28 ...


Jul 18, 2022 — SDA published the Tranche 1 Tracking Layer solicitation on March 17, two days after the President signed the fiscal year 2022 appropriations ...

SDA Announces Award for Tranche 1 Operations & ...


General Dynamics Mission Systems (CAGE 1VPW8) of Fairfax, Virginia is awarded a contract in the amount of $324,516,613 ($162,954,122 Base + $161,562,491 ...

Space Development Agency Completes Second ...


Sep 2, 2023 — In August 2020, SDA awarded firm-fixed-price T0 Transport satellite contracts resulting in a cost of approximately $15 million per satellite.Read more

DoD To Test Laser Communications Terminals in Low ...


Jun 8, 2020 — The agency next year plans to launch a pair of small satellites that will carry optical inter-satellite links made by SA Photonics. At the ...Read more

SDA Awards Prototype Agreement to Establish the Tranche ...


With the agreement finalized Sept. 30, 2022, York will provide 12 satellites and supporting capabilities to augment the Tranche 1 Transport Layer (T1TL) ...Read more

Space Development Agency – Increasing Warfighters ...


Science Applications International Corp., Reston, Virginia, was awarded a $54,908,584 cost-plus-award-fee contract for the Space Development Agency's Tranche ...

ON ORBIT


The first of 12 T1DES satellites launched on SpaceX's Transporter-14 from Vandenberg Space Force Base, California, on June 23, 2025. This pathfinder satellite ...Read more

Tranche 2 Tracking Layer includes ...


Jan 16, 2024 — The Space Development Agency (SDA) today announced the award of three prototype agreements to build 54 satellites to establish the Tranche 2 (T2) Tracking ...Read more

Space Development Agency Makes Awards to Build 72 ...


Date: Dec. 19, 2025. Tracking Layer Tranche 3 expands upon missile warning/missile tracking and missile defense capabilities deployed in Tranches 1 and 2.Read more

Agency Awards Contracts to Enable Data Transfer From ...


Sep 1, 2020 — York Space Systems, Denver, Colorado, was awarded a $94,036,666 firm ... Both awards are for SDA's transport layer Tranche 0, Lewis noted.Read more

Agency builds Tranche 2 team to produce ...


Oct 30, 2023 — SDA awarded a firm-fixed-price OTA agreement with a total potential value of approximately $732 million to Northrop Grumman Space Systems, ...Read more

News Releases – Page 2


Space Development Agency Makes Awards for Tranche 1 Transport Layer. Date: February 28, 2022 SDA has awarded three protoftype agreements worth approximately ...Read more

Two Military Satellites Just Communicated With Each Other ...


May 19, 2022 — Two satellites recently exchanged more than 200 gigabits of data over a distance of about 60 miles (100 kilometers) using laser communication in space.Read more

Speed. Delivery. Agility.


SDA will continue to partner with industry; finding ways to drive down price and drive up manufacturability so we can continue to push proliferation and ...Read more

skylinker.io
skylinker.io
DARPA Blackjack: A Flexible and Cost-Effective Military LEO ...


Feb 8, 2026 — In December 2025, Parsons was awarded a $30 million contract to further develop Blackjack support capabilities for the SDA. Current Status ...

space4peace.org
space4peace.org
Space Force rethinks satellite ground station strategy


Mar 2, 2026 — In parallel, the Space Force has been testing a more market-driven model through the Joint Antenna Marketplace run by the Space Systems Command.Read more

Space Force asks industry input for second phase of MEO ...


Apr 3, 2023 — The Resilient Missile Warning/Missile Tracking – MEO constellation will be incrementally developed in two- to three-year cycles by Space ...

satellitetoday.com
satellitetoday.com
Ball Aerospace and Microsoft Demonstrate ...


May 19, 2021 — ... Space Force Space and Missile Systems Center's (SMC) CASINO program office, which stands for Commercially Augmented Space Inter-Networked ...Read more

US Space Force Looks at RG-XX Solicitation Release in ...


Sep 25, 2025 — The future U.S. Space Force RG-XX satellites will be required to have on-orbit refueling capability, leadership said this week.

ATLAS Space Domain Awareness System Ready for Use, ...


Oct 2, 2025 — The U.S. Space Force Space Operations Command's (SpOC) Mission Delta 2 unit is now ready to employ the L3Harris ATLAS system.

LeoLabs to Build Space Radar in Costa Rica


Jul 23, 2020 — Latest News. Government/Military Space Force Surveying Industry on Collaboration With Canada on Allied Space Domain Awareness C2 · Technology ...Read more

LeoLabs' Costa Rica Space Radar Facility is Now Fully ...


Apr 22, 2021 — LeoLabs has commenced full operations at its Space Radar facility in Costa Rica. The company broke ground on the new phased-array radar in July 2020.

Ball Aerospace, Microsoft to Demonstrate Cloud ...


Sep 18, 2019 — The prototype effort, facilitated by the Defense Innovation Unit, will evaluate Ball Aerospace's use of Azure as the cloud platform for CASINO.Read more

Loft Federal and Microsoft Join Ball Aerospace's Team for ...


Apr 11, 2023 — The contract is worth up to $176 million and the satellites are set to fly beginning in 2024. Ball Aerospace announced April 11 Loft Federal, ...Read more

KSAT to Integrate AWS Ground Station Capabilities Into its ...


Jul 30, 2025 — AWS customers will now be able to access KSAT's global satellite ground station network and operation services as well as the services and tools ...Read more

US Space Force Taps 12 Space & Satellite Companies for ...


May 2, 2025 — The aim is to procure full lifecycle solutions for Science & Technology experiments through a Space Test Experiments Platform (STEP) 2.0 ...Read more

Telespazio Opens New Maricá Satellite Teleport, Hosting ...


Mar 6, 2023 — Telespazio Brasil opened a new Maricá satellite teleport in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on Wednesday March 1, hosting the new OneWeb Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) ...Read more

Seakr Awarded DARPA Blackjack Contract


Oct 10, 2019 — Seakr Engineering was awarded a Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Pit Boss contract supporting the Blackjack Proliferated Low-

Blue Canyon Technologies Completes Satellite Bus CDR ...


Dec 18, 2020 — Blue Canyon Technologies Completes Satellite Bus CDR for DARPA Blackjack Program. By Rachel Jewett | December 18, 2020. Facebook X LinkedIn ...

GAO Warns of Tech Readiness, Cost, and Schedule Risks ...


Jan 28, 2026 — The PWSA aims to detect and track potential missile threats in Low-Earth Orbit (LEO). The report found that the SDA assesses technology maturity ...Read more

Mircosoft Azure Exec Confirms Slew of New Partnerships ...


Sep 14, 2022 — Working with Microsoft, KSAT demonstrated how an existing customer, Loft Orbital, can test and onboard to Azure Orbital Ground Station and ...

NRO Formally Ends Contract with Terran Orbital for SAR


Oct 3, 2023 — The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) formally ended a commercial radar contract the agency had with PredaSAR, now Terran Orbital.Read more

GAO Report: DoD's Satellite Control Network Needs an ...


Apr 11, 2023 — “The officials stated that each satellite launch can now include 20 or more satellites at a time that will rely on SCN for regular contact ...Read more

SDA Looks to Next Year for Operational Utility of Tranche 1 ...


Sep 10, 2025 — In February 2022, SDA awarded York, Lockheed Martin, and Northrop Grumman contracts worth $1.8 billion to build the 126 Tranche 1, Transport ...Read more

SDA Awards Over $3.5 Billion For Tracking Layer Of ...


Dec 19, 2025 — Lockheed Martin received $1.1 billion, L3Harris $843 million, Rocket Lab $805 million, and Northrop Grumman $764 million for the future work.Read more

DARPA Names SEAKR Pit Boss Prime for Blackjack


Apr 28, 2020 — SEAKR was first awarded a DARPA Pit Boss contract in October 2019. DARPA's Blackjack program focuses on integrating commercial satellite ...Read more

CACI Demonstrates Optical Intersatellite Links for DARPA ...


May 17, 2022 — CACI International Inc demonstrated space-to-space optical communications links in Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) as part of the Mandrake II mission.Read more

Parsons Wins DARPA Contract to Prototype Ground ...


Jan 20, 2022 — DARPA awarded the $11 million sole-source contract in December 2021. Blackjack is a program to leverage commercial Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) ...Read more

quiverquant.com
quiverquant.com
Parsons Corporation Secures $30 Million Contract with ...


Dec 22, 2025 — Parsons Corporation secured a $30 million contract with the U.S. Space Development Agency to expand its Blackjack flight demonstration ...

news.satnews.com
news.satnews.com
Auria awarded USSF JAM prototype in support of U.S. + Allied ...


Jun 9, 2025 — Auria has received an $8.1 million award of the Joint Antenna Marketplace (JAM) prototype by US Space Force (USSF) Space Systems Command (SSC).Read more

The Team Of Ball Aerospace + Microsoft Complete Cloud ...


May 19, 2021 — Ball Aerospace, in collaboration with Microsoft, has successfully completed a series of demonstrations showing the viability of using commercial cloud ...Read more

Southern Launch receives an SSA sharing agreement with ...


Sep 28, 2022 — Under this new arrangement, Southern Launch will notify the United States Space Command (USSPACECOM) before launches to identify launch ...Read more

CNES Awards Loft Orbital Consortium €50M Contract for ...


Jan 22, 2026 — In a statement released January 21, 2026, the French space agency (CNES) announced it has awarded a contract to a consortium led by Loft ...Read more

Loft Orbital Contracted By AFWERX and USSF / SMC For NextGen ...


Loft Orbital has been awarded a Phase II Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) contract by AFWERX and sponsored by the U.S. Space Force (USSF) Space and ...

Terran Orbital selected by USSF for $237 million STEP 2.0 ...


May 4, 2025 — The STEP 2.0 contract is designed to streamline the path from concept to orbit for Department of Defense experiments by leveraging commercial ...Read more

USSPACECOM, NATO leaders affirm cooperation at Space ...


Apr 14, 2024 — U.S. Space Command and fellow NATO spacefaring nations reaffirmed their ironclad commitment to the safety and stability of the space domain ...Read more

Blue Canyon Technologies Completes CDR for DARPA ...


Dec 14, 2020 — Blue Canyon Technologies that it has completed its critical design review (CDR) for the Blackjack Program, a military space capabilities demonstration.

U.S. Space Command and Peru Sign SSA Agreement


May 20, 2020 — U.S. Space Command took another step in expanding its international space data sharing network; this time with the nation of Peru. Maj. Gen.Read more

A SpaceX Falcon 9 dispatched 72 smallsats to orbit including ...


Jun 12, 2023 — A SpaceX Falcon 9 launch of the Transporter-8 mission to LEO occurred at Space Launch Complex 4E (SLC-4E), at Vandenberg Space Force Base in California.Read more

Axient selected for USSF STEP 2.0 contract to accelerate ...


Jun 30, 2025 — Other organizations selected for the STEP 2.0 contract include Blue Canyon Technologies, General Atomics, Lockheed Martin Corp., Loft Orbital ...

ball.com
ball.com
Ball Aerospace-Microsoft Team Completes Demonstrations ...


May 19, 2021 — ... Space Force Space and Missile Systems Center's (SMC) Commercially Augmented Space Inter-Networked Operations (CASINO) Program Office, which ...Read more

Ball Aerospace and Microsoft Selected by Air Force to ...


Sep 17, 2019 — The prototype effort, facilitated by the Defense Innovation Unit, will evaluate Ball Aerospace's use of Azure as the cloud platform for ...

Ball Aerospace, Loft Federal and Microsoft to Collaborate on


Apr 11, 2023 — Team consisting of Ball Aerospace, Loft Federal and Microsoft will deliver 10 experimental Space Development Agency payloads to orbit.Read more

stocktitan.net
stocktitan.net
Parsons wins $30M SDA contract for DARPA Blackjack ...


Dec 22, 2025 — Parsons (NYSE: PSN) was awarded a $30 million contract and a novation to the U.S. Space Development Agency (SDA) on Dec. 22, 2025 to expand ...

facebook.com
facebook.com
🚀 A major leap forward for Space Force antenna services! ...


During a recent demo, we showcased how the Joint Antenna Marketplace (JAM) can connect commercial antennas to operational satellites in real ...Read more

Space Domain Awareness As part of the Chilean-led ...


"These space situational awareness data sharing agreements allow us to expand partnerships and enable information sharing in the ...Read more

Resolute Sentinel 24 | By the Numbers! “The strength in ...


Barton Kenerson Location: Peru, with ops across 3 countries Participants: 1,500+ personnel from Peru, Colombia, Ecuador, Chile, Brazil ...Read more

We're advancing our JAM! #SpaceForce Dynamic Satellite ...


We've selected two commercial companies to prototype the Joint Antenna Marketplace with a focus on delivering dynamic satellite operations.Read more

KSAT to extend ground network with Hyper ...


SALT LAKE CITY – Kongsberg Satellite Services announced plans Aug. 11 to extend its ground-based communications network into space.

United - Buckley Air Force Base, Colorado, is home to the ...


Our Guardians at Space Systems Command and across the Space Force are delivering the advanced capabilities we need to protect and defend the ...Read more

Since we were established in 2020, the Guardians and Airmen of ...


... LATTER DAY SAINTS UTAH . I only make 21.40 an hour and put in 36 hours every ... 🛰️ #GatewayToSpace #USSF5 Space Systems Command - SSC · Paul Weal ...

A bad bad man and there's no reason to sugarcoat it.


A man raised in Jehovah's Witnesses got together with a woman from the city. ... Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC) years ago. A USAF Pilot ...Read more

Space Fans


... JEHOVAH GOD ALLAH, THE GREATEST ATOMIC FATHER AND MOTHER, OF ALL ... United States Space Force | Space Systems Command - SSC · May be an ...Read more

MrBeast has formed a close relationship with the Mormon ...


... Latter-day Saints as a Diamond Sponsor, highlighting a major ... Space Systems Command - SSC. 󱙶. Follow · ADCC. 󱙶. Follow · Factz Verse.Read more

Claim of being Antichrist and Christian reactions


Maxwell lives only because she hid evidence across the globe — one cache seized last month by U.S. Space Force loyal to Trump. Trump knew ...Read more

General Lance W. Lord's career is defined by ... - Facebook


- Commander, Space Systems Command ... Services will be held on Friday, September 21st 1pm Memorial at: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints ...Read more

#USSPACECOM kicked off Global Sentinel 2025 yesterday ...


USSPACECOM kicked off Global Sentinel 2025 yesterday at Vandenberg Space Force Base. 29 nations and NATO reps are participating in exercises ...

Municipalidad de Upala


° 6545. Reserva de espacio para atención: http://ep.tpzcr.com:8090/ep Contactos para consultas: • Telespazio Argentina: 6050-4289 • ...

United States Space Force Gen. Stephen Whiting ...


De León Pepelescov, Chief of the Fuerza Aérea Uruguaya signed a Space Situational Awareness sharing agreement today at #SpaceSymposium 39, enhancing the safety, ...

Kratos wins $446 million Space Force contract for missile- ...


Kratos wins $446 million Space Force contract for missile-tracking ground systems The agreement is for ground management and integration for the

Jehovah's Witnesses Charity Work and Preaching ...


... Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society and its many commercial subsidiaries. This corporation doesn't produce “spiritual food” for free — it ...Read more

Air Force Materiel Command


... Space Force installations affected by the storms. TFAMS is a more ... Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is organized ...Read more

Maj. Gen. Brian Gibson


Apr 11, 2024 · 󰟠. Photos · U.S. Army Maj. Gen ... brazilian-air- force-sign-liaison-officer-agreement/ ... The U.S. Space Force's (USSF) Space Systems Com...

U.S. Space Command


On June 3, 2024, the Mexican Armed Forces made a historic stride towards enhanced space domain awareness and military cooperation by joining ...Read more

Space Systems Command - SSC


Unrivaled. Unprecedented. But we aren't done yet! On Saturday, SLD 45 is scheduled to send off our 101st launch, which means as an INSTALLATION we will tie the ...Read more

Space Systems Command - SSC


Nov 22, 2023 — This contract is to provide U.S. Space Force and U.S. Space Command satellite control capabilities and directly support the Defense Satellite ...Read more

Space Systems Command - SSC


SpaceForce missile warning and tracking delivered another win today with the team's award of a new agreement for ground management ...

Space Systems Command - SSC - The U.S. Air Force's ...


... NRL's TREx Service from a research and development project into an operational prototype for the #SpaceForce. During a recent demo, we showcased how the ...

U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command (SMDC)


Defense Secretary Dr. Mark T. Esper signs documents establishing the U.S. Space Command, making it the 11th unified combatant command, Aug. 29, ...

Space Systems Command - SSC


During a recent demo, we showcased how the Joint Antenna Marketplace ... successful-trex-transfer-d #SpaceStartsHere #Guardians · May be a ...Read more

Consulte el estado de su propiedad en www.rnpdigital.com


Floribeth Pérez Corrales buenos días, puede realizar la consulta gratuita ingresando a www.rnpdigital.com, dirigirse al botón “Sistema de ...Read more

SSC Space's laser ground station in Chile is ready to ...


SSC Space's laser ground station in Chile is ready to connect to space! Supported byy our Optical and Quantum Communications – ScyLight ...

Hoy se inauguró el Radar Espacial Costa Rica ...


Hoy se inauguró el Radar Espacial Costa Rica, el más avanzado de su clase en el mundo, de la empresa LeoLabs, Inc., líder comercial en el ...

SpaceX Transporter-8 launches 72 payloads marking 200th ...


Falcon 9 is lofting 72 payloads of varying sizes and purposes into a Sun-synchronous orbit. The launch occurred at 2:35 PDT (21:35 UTC). The booster landed at ...

Lord's career in modernizing America's space capabilities


- Commander, Space Systems Command (2021–2024): As the inaugural commander, led U.S. military space acquisitions and launch programs. - Vice ...Read more

Government and Jehovah's Witnesses invasion of privacy


Log in · Government and Jehovah's Witnesses invasion of privacy. Jehovah's Witnesses & Biblical Discussion Group.Read more

Kongsberg Satellite Services (KSAT) has been chosen ...


Jun 28, 2019 — Kongsberg Satellite Services (KSAT) has been chosen by NASA to deliver ground station services for NASAs new satellites.

news.clearancejobs.com
news.clearancejobs.com
Utah State’s Space Dynamics Lab Secures MDA $414M Contract Boost


https://news.clearancejobs.com/2026/03/21/utah-states-space-dynamics-lab-secures-mda-414m-contract-boost/

losangeles.spaceforce.mil
losangeles.spaceforce.mil
Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC)


The Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC) is the U.S. Space Force (USSF) center of excellence for acquiring and developing military space systems.Read more

Space Systems Command geared to deliver swift, responsive ...


Apr 8, 2021 — The Command is set to officially stand up in summer 2021 once all required conditions are met to re-designate the Space and Missile Systems ...Read more

chapter vi: air force satellite control network


Another significant upgrade was the Automated Remote Tracking Station (ARTS) program, which introduced more modern equipment at the tracking stations. The ...Read more

Air Force's Space and Missile Systems Center awards Hosted ...


Jul 24, 2019 — The Air Force's Space and Missile Systems Center has awarded Maxar Technologies a firm fixed-price delivery order under the Hosted Payload Solutions Indefinite ...Read more

barchart.com
barchart.com
Parsons Awarded $30M Contract to Enhance Support ...


Dec 22, 2025 — Parsons Awarded $30M Contract to Enhance Support to DARPA Blackjack Space Mission. Parsons Services Company - GlobeNewswire - Mon Dec 22, 2025 ...

defensedaily.com
defensedaily.com
Parsons Receives $30 Million Under DARPA Blackjack ...


Parsons Corp. has received a $30 million contract for flight demonstration under the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and ...

sphinxdefense.com
sphinxdefense.com
Space Force selects vendors to build cloud based ground ...


The U.S. Space Force has awarded contracts worth a combined $17.6 million to two Colorado-based defense firms to build prototype cloud-based marketplaces ...Read more

News & Press


USSF's SSC advances antenna services with TREx transfer during JAM demo. The U.S. Space Force has awarded contracts worth a combined $17.6 million to two ...Read more

keeptrack.space
keeptrack.space
Kratos Wins $446M Space Force Missile-Warning Contract


2 days ago — Kratos Defense has been awarded a $446 million Space Force contract to provide ground management and integration for the Resilient Missile ...Read more

c4isrnet.com
c4isrnet.com
A Pentagon experiment to process the torrent of data from ...


Sep 26, 2019 — Building off of DARPA's Blackjack efforts, CASINO is the SMC's program for developing technology for a proliferated LEO constellation. Using ...Read more

Space Force establishes Space Systems Command


Aug 13, 2021 — 13, replacing the Space and Missile Systems Center it inherited from the Air Force with the new Space Systems Command. Like its predecessor, SSC ...Read more

Space Development Agency launch delayed by supply ...


Sep 14, 2022 — The agency awarded the Tranche 0 contracts in 2020, choosing Lockheed Martin and York Space Systems to build the data relay, or transport ...Read more

Space Force unveils plans for Space Systems Command


Apr 8, 2021 — Under the restructuring to speed up new technology delivery, Space Systems Command (SSC) will replace the Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC) ...

DARPA set to launch first Blackjack satellite later this year


May 12, 2020 — With Blackjack, DARPA seeks to demonstrate the value of low earth orbit satellites for the Department of Defense. The small satellites will ...Read more

sahmcapital.com
sahmcapital.com
Parsons Wins $30 Million Contract to Support DARPA ...


Dec 22, 2025 — The expanded contract will enable Parsons to consolidate Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) spacecraft support and provide comprehensive ...

afcea.org
afcea.org
New Prototype Supports the Space Force's Commercial ...


Oct 28, 2025 — The prototype and integration with the Joint Antenna Marketplace will help operators leverage commercial systems for robust and scalable ...Read more

The Space Force Officially Stands Up the Space Systems ...


Aug 13, 2021 — Leaders spent the last year developing the new field command redesignated from the Air Force's Space and Missile Systems Center, Los Angeles Air ...Read more

SEAKR Engineering is Assisting with DARPA Blackjack ...


Mar 15, 2021 — SEAKR Engineering Inc.,* Centennial, Colorado, has been awarded a $60,487,495 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for the Blackjack Pit Boss Phase ...Read more

Space Development Agency Selects Lockheed, Rocket ...


Dec 19, 2025 — The Space Development Agency (SDA) announced on December 19 four awards to procure 72 satellites for its Tranche 3 Tracking Layer constellation.Read more

U.S. Space Force Takes Steps Toward Enabling ...


Oct 9, 2025 — Space Systems Command's recent contract and Enterprise Space Activity Group establishment aim to support commercial space services.Read more

engineering.com
engineering.com
Ball Aerospace and Microsoft Show That the Cloud Works ...


May 25, 2021 — CASINO serves as the Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC) focal point for dispersed LEO technology and prototyping. CASINO's work is ...Read more

streetinsider.com
streetinsider.com
Parsons wins $30M contract to support DARPA Blackjack ...


Dec 22, 2025 — The contract represents an expansion of Parsons' role in the Blackjack program as operations transfer from DARPA to the Space Development Agency ...

saffm.hq.af.mil
saffm.hq.af.mil
FY26 Space Force Procurement - Justification Book - USAF


The Joint Tactical Ground Station (JTAGS) disseminates near real time warning, alerting, and cueing information on ballistic missile launches and other ...Read more

FY23 Space Force Procurement - Justification Book - USAF


For construction, procurement, and modification of spacecraft, launch services, and related equipment. (including ground control and communication ...Read more

console.sweetspotgov.com
console.sweetspotgov.com
NMC2 FY26 - Sweetspot


This contract is critical for maintaining the operational effectiveness of the nuclear enterprise, with a performance period starting from March 5, 2026, and ...Read more

sam.gov
sam.gov
Space- and Ground-Based Environmental Monitoring (EM) ...


Feb 3, 2026 — SSC has entered into contracts with Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) and/or Systems Engineering and Integration (SE&I), ...Read more

Satellite Control Network Tracking Station Operations ...


Satellite Control Network Tracking Station Operations, Remote Site, and ... Remote Tracking Station (MTR) Electronic Suites, Remote Tracking Station ...Read more

RFP - Space Test Experiment Platform (STEP) 2.0


The Step 2.0 program establishes a Multiple-Award Indefinite Delivery/Indefinite Quantity (IDIQ) contract with separate Delivery Orders (DOs) to procure proven ...Read more

Transmit/Receive Enterprise (TREx) Service


The intent of this RFI is to gauge industry interest, capabilities, and relevant experience to support NRL personnel in performing the requirements stated in ...Read more

SDA Tranche 1 Operations & Integration (O&I)


Jan 3, 2022 — The Contractor will demonstrate the capabilities to manage, operate, maintain, and provide logistical and general support for the T1 O&I.Read more

SDA Tranche 1 Operations & Integration (O&I)


This is a U.S. General Services Administration Federal Government computer system that is "FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY." This system is subject to monitoring.Read more

TACTICAL Broad Agency Announcement (BAA)


SAM.gov The System for Award Management (SAM) is the Official U.S. Government system that consolidated the capabilities of CCR/FedReg, ORCA, and EPLS.

Evolved Strategic Satellite Communications (ESS) Space ...


The Government intends to competitively award a contract for the development and production of four ESS Space Vehicles (SVs) with a Period of Performance ...Read more

sources sought resilient meo missile warning and tracking ...


Sources Sought Synopsis. RESILIENT MEO MISSILE WARNING AND TRACKING (RMMWT). GROUND MANAGEMENT AND INTEGRATION (GMI). Description / Purpose.Read more

Future Requirements for Fiscal Year 2026


Jan 29, 2026 — The United States Space Force (USSF) Commercial Satellite Communications (COMSATCOM) Office, or CSCO, presents the following information to ...Read more

DRAFT RFP - Space Test Experiment Platform (STEP) 2.0


The Space Test Experiment Platform 2.0 STEP 2.0 program is seeking to establish a multiple award Indefinite Delivery/Indefinite Quantity IDIQ contract.Read more

war.gov
war.gov
Contracts for March 19, 2026


2 days ago — Commdex LLC,* Smyrna, Georgia, is awarded a $34,946,592 firm-fixed-price contract for the design and construction of low altitude radio ...Read more

U.S. Southern Command Urges Space Conference ...


Feb 6, 2024 — The conference, held in Miami, attracted 10 partner nations: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru and ...Read more

Remarks by DOD General Counsel on "Space Law ...


Mar 5, 2024 — DOD general counsel gave remarks on "Space Law: Promoting the Rules-based Order through Multi-Domain Lawyering" at U.S. Space Command Legal.

U.S., Partner Nations Strengthen Space Interoperability ...


Feb 20, 2024 — In addition to the U.S. and Italy, this year's participants included Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Finland, France, Germany, ...Read more

Contracts For Aug. 6, 2021


Aug 6, 2021 — The Space and Missile Systems Center, Los Angeles Air Force Base, California, is the contracting activity (FA8807-21-C-0006). ARMY.Read more

Space Development Agency Successfully Launches ...


Apr 2, 2023 — SDA awarded firm-fixed-price contracts for T0 satellites resulting in a cost of approximately $15 million per Transport satellite and is ...Read more

Contracts For May. 26, 2022


May 26, 2022 — SPACE DEVELOPMENT AGENCY. General Dynamics Mission Systems, Fairfax, Virginia, is awarded a contract in the amount of $324,516,613, including ...Read more

Contracts For Aug. 12, 2025


Aug 12, 2025 — Fiscal 2025 research, development, test and evaluation funds in the amount of $11,000,000 are being obligated at time of award. The Space ...Read more

Contracts - Search "Space Systems Command" - Page 6


U.S. Department of War contracts valued at $7.5 million or more are announced each business day at 5 p.m..

Agency Awards Contracts for Tracking Layer of National ...


Oct 5, 2020 — The Space Development Agency announced today that two companies won bids to build out Tranche 0 of the tracking layer for the National ...Read more

en.wikipedia.org
en.wikipedia.org
Missile Warning Center


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Missile_Warning_Center

Persistent Close Air Support


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persistent_Close_Air_Support

Advanced Systems and Development Directorate


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Systems_and_Development_Directorate

Space Systems Command


On 13 August 2021, the Space and Missile Systems Center was redesignated as Space Systems Command on 13 August 2021. The commander is a Space Force ...Read more

Blackjack (satellite)


Blackjack is a constellation of small American surveillance satellites that started to be launched in 2023. The Blackjack program was started by DARPA in ...Read more

Satellite Control Network


Current Remote Tracking Stations · Diego Garcia Station (DGS), Diego Garcia, BIOT; callsign REEF. · Guam Tracking Station (GTS), Guam; callsign GUAM. · Hawaii ...Read more

Cape Canaveral Space Force Station


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cape_Canaveral_Space_Force_Station

Patrick Space Force Base


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrick_Space_Force_Base

Malabar Transmitter Annex


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malabar_Transmitter_Annex

DARPA


Blackjack (2017): a program to develop and test military satellite constellation technologies with a variety of "military-unique sensors and payloads ...Read more

Fucino Space Centre


The Fucino Space Centre is the largest teleport in the world for civilian uses used for the control of artificial satellites, for telecommunicationsRead more

Space Development Agency


... Tranche 1 Tracking Layer; 12 in the Tranche 1 Demonstration and Experimentation System. In 2022 contracts were awarded to York Space Systems, Lockheed ...

Jehovah's Witnesses


Nathan Knorr was appointed as third president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society in 1942. Knorr organized large international assemblies, instituted ...Read more

Space Operations Center (Brazil)


In April 2024, the commanders of U.S.Space Command and the Brazil Space Operations Center signed a memorandum of agreement to assign a liaison officer to ...Read more

Leonardo (company)


Headquartered in Rome, the company has 180 sites worldwide. It is the 12th largest defence contractor in the world based on 2020 revenues.Read more

TacSat-4


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TacSat-4

Airborne Launch Assist Space Access


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Airborne_Launch_Assist_Space_Access

Space Rapid Capabilities Office


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_Rapid_Capabilities_Office

Operationally Responsive Space Office


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operationally_Responsive_Space_Office

Will Roper


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Will_Roper

Mission control center


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mission_control_center

Kongsberg Satellite Services


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kongsberg_Satellite_Services

Troll Satellite Station


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Troll_Satellite_Station

eoportal.org
eoportal.org
Development and mission status of the Blackjack Program


- The interoperability demonstration is part of the Space Systems Command's CASINO program (short for commercially augmented space inter-networked operations).Read more

USSF (United States Space Force)


... space assets.” - The contract is funded by the Space Systems Command's CASINO (Commercially Augmented space Inter-networked Operations) program, created to ...Read more

KSAT (Kongsberg Satellite Services)


June 28, 2019: Kongsberg Satellite Services (KSAT) has been chosen by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to deliver ground station ...Read more

LeoLabs commercial ground-based tracking service ...


The U.S. Space Force declared the original Space Fence, located on Kwajalein Island in the Republic of the Marshall Islands, operational in 2020, but has not ...Read more

Loft Orbital — an infrastructure company that flies customer ...


- These include work on two satellite buses for the Blackjack LEO constellation, under a contract the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) awarded ...Read more

Capella X-SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar) Constellation


- Launching later this year, the mission will loft the first satellite of Capella Space's Whitney constellation on an Electron launch vehicle from Rocket Lab's ...Read more

USSF (United States Space Force)


- The Space Systems Command was stood up in August 2021 and replaced the Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC) which was first established in 1954. - A former ...

apogee-magazine.com
apogee-magazine.com
DOD, Partners Working to Identify, Block GPS Jamming


Jul 25, 2024 — CASINO stands for commercially augmented space internetworked operations. “GPS is heavily integrated in the day-to-day operations of our global ...Read more

SIGNALS FROM SOUTH AMERICA


Dec 6, 2023 — CASINO stands for commercially augmented space internetworked operations. “GPS is heavily integrated in the day-to-day operations of our global ...Read more

Space Renaissance


Jul 25, 2024 — In August 2018, Brazil and the U.S. Department of Defense signed a Space Situational Awareness Agreement, followed in March 2019 by a ...Read more

govinfo.gov
govinfo.gov
- MILITARY SPACE OPERATIONS, POLICY, AND ...


... Space Commercially Augmented Mission Platform (CAMP) and Enterprise Space Battle Management Command & Control (ESBMC2) efforts, which are already pulling ...Read more

EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS


Jul 25, 2003 — the Space and Missile Systems Center at Los. Angeles Air Force Base ... Jehovah's Witnesses who refuse to serve in the military to harsh ...Read more

Official Congressional Directory


Oct 26, 2022 — ... Space Systems Command ....................... 644. Space Development ... Latter-Day Saints; family: wife,. Cindy; six children; four ...Read more

SENATE-Wednesday, October 12, 1988


Oct 12, 1988 — Trust ye in the. Lord for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.-Isaiah 26:3-4. God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, as pressure ...Read more

ndia.dtic.mil
ndia.dtic.mil
Delivering Capabilities


Mar 8, 2021 — CASINO = Commercially Augmented Space Inter Network Operations. HBTSS = Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking Space Sensor. LINCS = Laser ...Read more

academia.edu
academia.edu
(PDF) Space Development Agency - Delivering Capabilities


... CASINO = Commercially Augmented Space Inter Network Operations MSE&I = Mission Systems Engineering & Integration Transport Layer LINCS = Laser Interconnect ...Read more

(PDF) FUNDAMENTOS DE INGENIERIA GEOTÈCNICA


= 4.8 X 10“^cm /s = 4.8 X 10“^m/s q = (4.8 X 10“5)(sen5°)(3 eos 5°) (3600) ... La punta se empuja en el terreno a razón de 20 mm/s. Alambres de los ...

nro.gov
nro.gov
CORONA Star Catchers


He is a civilian Air Force historian for the Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC) at Los Angeles AFB, California, a subordinate unit of Air Force Space.Read more

defensenews.com
defensenews.com
Space Systems Command is more than a name change ...


Aug 25, 2021 — — This month, the U.S. Space Force replaced its long-established acquisitions arm — the Space and Missile Systems Center — with a new field ...Read more

Amid demand for satellite support, Space Force leans on ...


May 16, 2025 — The Space Force this week announced a new Joint Antenna Marketplace aimed at helping it leverage commercial capacity and relieve the strain on its Satellite ...Read more

darpa.mil
darpa.mil
Blackjack


DARPA's Blackjack program aims to develop and demonstrate the critical elements for a global high-speed network in low Earth orbit (LEO).Read more

Blackjack Focuses on Risk Reduction Flights and ...


May 11, 2020 — DARPA's Blackjack program is targeting flights to low-Earth orbit (LEO) later this year and 2021. Using a series of small risk reduction satellites.Read more

DARPA: Home


Since 1958, DARPA has held to an enduring mission: To create technological surprise for U.S. national security.

Blackjack Program Successfully Deploys Two Mandrake 2 ...


Jul 7, 2021 — Conceived as an early risk-reduction flight for DARPA's Blackjack program, the Mandrake 2 mission will prove out advanced laser communications ...Read more

defense advanced research projects agency


DARPA's Blackjack program might provide the means to transition many of today's national security space missions from big, expensive satellites to a ...Read more

housing.af.mil
housing.af.mil
Los Angeles Air Force Base Dormitory Handbook 20 July ...


Jan 30, 2019 — SIGNS FOR ADVERTISING BUSINESSES ARE. PROHIBITED IN THE DORMITORY AREAS. Contact the base housing office for additional information. 6.2 ...Read more

Community Housing Guide


Vandenberg Space Force Base. California. Community Housing Guide. Military ... CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER DAY SAINTS. JEHOVAH'S WITNESS. CATHOLIC ...Read more

bluecanyontech.com
bluecanyontech.com
RTX completes milestones on DARPA Blackjack Program ...


Jan 30, 2024 — The Blackjack program seeks to establish an equally effective network in low-Earth orbit using a constellation of four connected satellites.Read more

Blue Canyon selects Orbion electric thrusters for DARPA's ...


Sep 15, 2020 — Blue Canyon Technologies announced Sept. 15 it selected Orbion Space Technology to supply the electric propulsion system for the US military's Blackjack ...

Blue Canyon Technologies Completes Performance ...


Oct 2, 2019 — BCT is designing an ESPA-class microsat for Blackjack, incorporating their state-of-the-art commoditized FleXbus spacecraft architecture. The ...

News » Lockheed Martin wins DARPA contract to integrate ...


Apr 27, 2020 — Blackjack is a project to deploy a constellation of 20 satellites in low Earth orbit by 2022 and demonstrate that a LEO system can provide ...Read more

governmentattic.org
governmentattic.org
Air Force Entertainment Liaison Office Weekly Activities ...


Jul 5, 2008 — This is in response to you July 22, 2006 Freedom of Information Act request for a information from the Air Force Entertainment Liaison Office.Read more

airandspaceforces.com
airandspaceforces.com
USSF's Space Systems Command Stands Up


Aug 13, 2021 — The Space and Missile Systems Center restructured and rebranded itself as SMC 2.0 in 2019 with the goal of acquiring systems faster, and Raymond ...Read more

AGE OF AIR POWER


Aug 8, 2022 — □Commercially Augmented Space Inter-Networked Oper- ations (CASINO) program. In conjunction with the Blackjack program, CASINO is working ...Read more

Space Force Satellite Control Network In Urgent Need of ...


Apr 11, 2023 — The Satellite Control Network (SCN) is made up of 19 antennas stationed around the world, from Diego Garcia Island in the Indian Ocean to the ...Read more

Latest Small Business Tech Contracts Include Airborne AI ...


May 20, 2021 — Edge Computing in Space. Loft Orbital of San Francisco received ... With an edge processor onboard, a satellite could start processing ...Read more

SDA Awards Deal to York for 62 More LEO Satellites


Oct 20, 2023 — The Space Development Agency (SDA) awarded a $615 million contract to York Space Systems for 62 satellites for its PWSA constellation.

SDA Hands Out $3.5B for 72 New Missile Tracking Satellites


Dec 19, 2025 — SDA awarded $3.5 billion in new contracts for the next iteration of its advanced missile warning, tracking, and defense constellation.

USSF Unveils Space Systems Command's Structure


Apr 8, 2021 — The Space Force's new Space Systems Command will oversee the new service's acquisition and launch services under one command.Read more

Space Force Satellite Refueling Demos Coming in 2026 ...


Apr 8, 2025 — The Space Force will have its first satellite refueling demo ever in 2026 and another in 2028, but after that remains unclear.

Space Systems Command to Stand Up in 2021


Oct 1, 2020 — The Space Force will stand up its Space Systems Command to oversee software and hardware acquisition “sooner rather than later” in 2021.

Space Force Program Office Turns to New Acquisition Tools


Jan 27, 2026 — Space Force leaders are implementing acquisition reforms and new contracting mechanisms like Commercial Solutions Openings.

digitalcommons.usu.edu
digitalcommons.usu.edu
Achievements and Lessons From the DARPA Blackjack ...


by E Silva · 2024 · Cited by 2 — The program's architecture is built on Blue Canyon's ESPA-Grande Saturn bus, housing the SEAKR Pit Boss Processor, Stormking Radio. Frequency (RF) Payload, and ...Read more

Enabling Hybrid Architectures and Mesh Network ...


by SO Kennedy Jr · 2020 — Dennis Bythewood, Program Executive Officer for. Space Development at SMC, has stated “SMC is planning a transition of the [BlackJack] architecture to a program ...Read more

nellis.af.mil
nellis.af.mil
Space Systems Command geared to deliver swift ...


Apr 8, 2021 — The Command is set to officially stand up in summer 2021 once all required conditions are met to re-designate the Space and Missile Systems ...Read more

battle-updates.com
battle-updates.com
SATELLITE SYSTEMS, SATCOM AND SPACE ...


Apr 15, 2022 — ... Systems Center's Commercially Augmented Space Inter-Networked Operations (CASINO) project. Ball is planning for future demonstrations with ...Read more

ojp.gov
ojp.gov
BASIC ELEMENTS INTELLIGENCE


This manual is the product of two men experienced in the processes and operations of intelligence at the national level. They have spent many.Read more

linkedin.com
linkedin.com
Beginning of New Era: SMC and SSC - Mike Gruntman


On August 13, 2021, the United States Space Force replaced the storied Space and Missile Systems Center, SMC, with the new Space Systems Command, or SSC.Read more

SpaceForce boosts satellite operations with JAM


We've selected two commercial companies to prototype the Joint Antenna Marketplace with a focus on delivering dynamic satellite operations.Read more

Space Systems Command's Post


... Latter-Day Saints Mormon Masonic ΣΧ Sigma Chi Brother AUTISM & Taylor Swift SME 天才。 1y. Report this comment; Close menu. BZ everyone at Space Systems Command ...

Space Systems Command's Post


Space Systems Command's Post. View organization page for Space Systems ... Latter-Day Saints Mormon Masonic ΣΧ Sigma Chi Brother AUTISM ...Read more

Personal Roots, Professional Influence 🎖️🎬 The decision ...


... Latter-Day Saints Mormon Masonic ΣΧ Sigma Chi Brother AUTISM ... Space Systems Command awards National Security Space Launch Phase 3 Lane 2 ...Read more

#ussf | Space Systems Command


Space Systems Command's #USSF Brig. Gen. Kristin Panzenhagen was recently featured in SpaceNews's series highlighting female leaders in the space industry.

Integrate has been awarded a $25 million contract by the United ...


Integrate has been awarded a $25 million contract by the United States Space Force to modernize how complex space programs are executed ... This #SBIR Phase II ...

Space Force Advances with Joint Antenna Marketplace ...


These missions will help deploy advanced missile warning and tracking satellites and enhance defense systems from space. This is a significant ...

Telespazio - veloce #veloce


Our activities in Brazil and across Latin America demonstrate how satellite technologies can support both institutional and social needs ...Read more

Kratos wins $446 million Space Force contract for missile- ...


Kratos wins $446 million Space Force contract for missile-tracking ground systems The agreement is for ground management and integration for the

#missilewarningdefense | SatNews


U.S. Space Force Awards $446.8 Million Agreement to Kratos for MEO Missile Tracking Ground Segment On Tuesday, March 17, 2026, ...

SatNews


U.S. Space Force Awards $446.8 Million Agreement to Kratos for MEO Missile Tracking Ground Segment On Tuesday, March 17, 2026, the U.S. Space Force's Space ...Read more

US Space Force Activates Satellite Communications ...


CIA Leadership Consultant as Diplomat for Students For Liberty US Space Force AMB DELTA 13 NATO JMO SME Church of Jesus Christ of Latter ...Read more

#space #nasa #astronaut #events | Eliza Maria Iana


CIA Leadership Consultant as Diplomat for Students For Liberty US Space Force AMB DELTA 13 NATO JMO SME Church of Jesus Christ of Latter ...Read more

RETScreen 9.4 adds new weather data services


... ground stations ... CIA Leadership Consultant as Diplomat for Students For Liberty US Space Force AMB DELTA 13 NATO JMO SME Church of Jesus Christ ...Read more

US Naval Research Laboratory's Post


... Transmit/Receive Enterprise (TREx) service to provide advanced software development and mission operations support across the space community.

SDA Selects LMT for Space-Based Missile Defense


Patrick Little, SSC's SYD 85 program director. Read the full story and learn how TREx and JAM are shaping the future of satellite ...

Loft Federal wins NASA task order for RISC V flight computer


Loft Federal wins NASA task order for fault tolerant RISC V flight computer: Los Angeles CA (SPX) Sep 03, 2025 Loft Orbital Federal has ...

Ander Ochoa Gilo's Post


Sep 2, 2025 — Loft Orbital Federal, LLC Awarded NASA Task Order to ...Read more

US Space Force officer helps Brazil establish space sensor


Strengthening space cooperation between the United States and #Brazil. Capt. Tanya Olivas, a United States Space Force exchange officer with ...

Michael J. Listner's Post


#OTD in 2020 #USSPACECOM signed a Space Situational Awareness (SSA) sharing agreement with Peru's National Space Agency, Agencia Espacial ...Read more

Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, Rocket Lab ...


The Space Development Agency (SDA) today announced the award of four prototype agreements, with a total value of approximately $3.5 billion, ...

ASRC Federal's Post


... TREx cloud solution to the USSF Space Systems Command! TREx will be integrated into a larger cloud enterprise, enhancing connectivity among ...

CACI Acquires ARKA Group, Enhancing Space-Based ...


... SpaceForce. During a recent demo, we showcased how the Joint Antenna Marketplace (JAM) can connect commercial antennas to operational ...Read more

Sheena Sharma's Post


Proud to announce we just launched our 10th AWS Ground Station antenna location in Punta Arenas, Chile. Like all AWS Ground Stations, we ...Read more

ESA Connectivity and Secure Communications' Post


SSC Space's new Optical Ground Station has officially passed site acceptance tests and is ready for operation in Santiago, Chile.

Ben Pearson - Northrop Grumman


Missionary. Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Aug 2003 - Aug 2005 2 years 1 month. Social Services. Helped people live healthier lives, helping to ...Read more

Travis Woodfield - United States Air Force


The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Graphic. Missionary. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Aug 2014 - Aug 2016 2 years 1 month.Read more

space.skyrocket.de
space.skyrocket.de
Aces 1, 2, 3, 4 - Gunter's Space Page


Nov 12, 2025 — The four identical Blackjack satellites were constructed on commercial Saturn-class buses manufactured by Blue Canyon, a Raytheon Technologies ...Read more

satelliteevolutiongroup.com
satelliteevolutiongroup.com
February issue.pmd


Center's Commercially Augmented Space Inter Networked. Operations (CASINO) program. ... The CASINO program office approached the Defense Innovation Unit ...Read more

lafss.com
lafss.com
About LA AFB | Los Angeles Air Force Base


Provide the best support to Los Angeles AFB by delivering education, fitness, personnel services, quality-of-life programs and activities to sustain the mission ...Read more

defence.nridigital.com
defence.nridigital.com
Project Blackjack: DARPA's LEO satellites


Dec 16, 2020 — We speak to DARPA and Lockheed Martin about project Blackjack, a low earth orbit satellite constellation for the US military.

Project Blackjack: DARPA's LEO satellites


Jul 15, 2020 — We speak to DARPA and Lockheed Martin about project Blackjack, a low earth orbit satellite constellation for the US military.

cops.usdoj.gov
cops.usdoj.gov
A Guide for State, Local, and Tribal Law Enforcement Agencies


by DL Carter — This guide is intended to provide fundamental information about the contemporary law enforcement intelligence function in its application to state, local, and ...Read more

potomacofficersclub.com
potomacofficersclub.com
Blue Canyon Delivers First Blackjack Satellite Bus To DARPA


Sep 9, 2022 — The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency has received the first Blackjack satellite bus from Blue Canyon Technologies.Read more

Ball Aerospace Partners With Loft Federal, Microsoft On ...


Apr 12, 2023 — Post navigation. CISA to Issue Secure-by-Design Software Development Rules · Space Systems Command Prepares to Assess Enigma Prototype. Related ...

GAO Calls On US Space Force To Increase Satellite ...


Apr 12, 2023 — According to a GAO report released on Monday, SCN-supported satellite launches have tripled since 2012, and the 19-antenna infrastructure might ...Read more

Parsons Secures $55M SSC Contract For Ground Segment ...


May 1, 2023 — The Space Systems Command has awarded Parsons Corp. a six-year, $55 million contract for work on the Missile Track Custody Epoch 1 Program.

spacecom.mil
spacecom.mil
SOUTHCOM Hosts US-Chile Space Engagement Talks ...


Oct 29, 2020 — US Southern Command hosted US-Chile Space Engagement Talks with US military and Chilean representatives during separate virtual sessions Oct. 28-29.Read more

USSPACECOM advances space partnerships in South ...


Apr 11, 2024 — US Space Command leaders met with representatives from Uruguay, Colombia, Brazil, and Peru to strengthen and expand space cooperation among partner nations.Read more

RS24 enhances global space domain awareness with ...


Jun 10, 2024 — Throughout exercise Resolute Sentinel 2024, the U.S. and its allies gathered throughout South America to conduct Space Domain Awareness (SDA) ...Read more

USSPACECOM, CONIDA, and the Peruvian Air Force sign ...


Apr 18, 2023 — Gen. José Antonio García Morgan, CONIDA director, signed the agreement during Space Symposium 38 in Colorado Springs, Colo. USSPACECOM's Space ...Read more

US, Peru expand space data sharing partnership


This agreement will give Peru access to the highest quality satellite tracking data available to assist them with PerúSat-1 and its eventual follow-on.Read more

25 Nations Participate in Global Sentinel 22


Participation from 25 nations includes the US, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Germany, Israel, Spain, Finland, France, United Kingdom, Greece, Italy, ...Read more

Global Sentinel 25 capstone completes at Vandenberg


May 14, 2025 — For GS25, a total of 28 countries participated, including the U.S., Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Denmark, Finland, ...Read more

USSPACECOM and Uruguayan Air Force Sign Space ...


Apr 9, 2024 — US Space Command and the Uruguayan Air Force signed a Space Situational Awareness information sharing agreement, Apr. 9, 2024.Read more

USSPACECOM, Brazilian Air Force Sign Liaison Officer ...


Apr 11, 2024 — U.S. Space Command and the Brazilian Air Force signed an arrangement to assign a Brazilian liaison officer to USSPACECOM, Apr. 11, 2024.,

photos and videos


USSPACECOM, Brazilian Air Force Sign Liaison Officer Agreement. U.S. Space ... April 10, 2024. This meeting builds upon the relationship with Brazil and ...Read more

USSPACECOM, NATO leaders affirm cooperation at Space ...


Apr 12, 2024 — In addition to agreements signed with Uruguay and Brazil, USSPACECOM and the Spanish Space Command met to sign a Memorandum of Agreement ...Read more

Press Release: SBIRS GEO-6 Operational Acceptance


Mar 28, 2023 — SBIRS GEO-6 was formally transferred from Space Systems Command (SSC) to Space Operations Command (SpOC), March 24, 2023.Read more

USSPACECOM signs 100th commercial agreement to ...


Jul 1, 2021 — US Space Command signed the 100th Commercial Space Situational Awareness Data Sharing Agreement in the history of the command with Libre Space Foundation.Read more

U.S. Space Command 'accelerates momentum' at ...


Apr 15, 2024 — During the week, USSPACECOM senior leaders met with more than 15 nations, expanding partner integration through the signing of a Space ...Read more

southcom.mil
southcom.mil
SOUTHCOM Hosts New U.S. Space Force 'U.S.-Brazil ...


Aug 13, 2020 — US Southern Command hosted US Space Force and Brazilian counterparts for the newly established virtual US-Brazil Space Engagement Talks.Read more

USSPACECOM and Uruguayan Air Force Sign Space ...


Apr 9, 2024 — US Space Command and the Uruguayan Air Force signed a Space Situational Awareness information sharing agreement, Apr. 9, 2024.Read more

Resolute Sentinel 2024


Resolute Sentinel 2024, hosted in Peru, is joint training exercise aimed at enhancing regional security and interoperability among Peru, Colombia, Ecuador, ...

USSPACECOM advances space partnerships in South ...


Apr 11, 2024 — US Space Command leaders met with representatives from Uruguay, Colombia, Brazil, and Peru to strengthen and expand space cooperation among partner nations.Read more

USSPACECOM signs SSA with Uruguay


De León Pepelescov, Chief of Uruguayan Air Force, sign a Space Situational Awareness information-sharing agreement during Space Symposium 39 in Colorado Springs ...Read more

Peru Bolsters International Space Collaboration with Key ...


Jul 28, 2023 — Operation HARPY SUR, a space exercise nested under Exercise RESOLUTE SENTINEL 2023, has opened a new chapter in international space collaboration.Read more

US, Peru expand space data sharing partnership


Maj. Gen. Javier Tuesta Marquez, National Commission on Aerospace Research and Development (CONIDA), Republic of Peru, signs a space data sharing Memorandum ...

News - Tag Space Command


11, 2024. USSPACECOM signs SSA with Uruguay. April 9, 2024. USSPACECOM and Uruguayan Air Force Sign Space Situational Awareness Information Sharing Agreement.Read more

USSPACECOM, Brazilian Air Force Sign Liaison Officer ...


USSPACECOM, Brazilian Air Force Sign Liaison Officer Agreement. U.S. ... April 11, 2024. This agreement builds upon the relationship with Brazil and ...Read more

United States, Republic of Peru sign historic agreement to ...


Apr 30, 2019 — The governments of the United States and the Republic of Peru entered into the US-Peru Aeronautical and Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR) Agreement.Read more

News - Tag Uruguay


April 9, 2024. USSPACECOM and Uruguayan Air Force Sign Space Situational Awareness Information Sharing Agreement. COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. — U.S. Space Command ...Read more

media.defense.gov
media.defense.gov
Proposal for the Creation of a Brazilian Space Force


Sep 25, 2025 — space situational awareness (SSA)—without additional operational support, the establishment of 1EOE may be deemed unnecessary. Additionally ...Read more

Air Force SBIR Phase I


Aug 22, 2023 — PHASE III DUAL USE APPLICATIONS: Implement the ML-enhanced IRST detection and tracking algorithm in a ruggedized low SWaP processor to meet the ...Read more

afsouth.af.mil
afsouth.af.mil
Multinational military exercise Resolute Sentinel 2024 ...


May 29, 2024 — The multinational military exercise Resolute Sentinel 2024 officially began May 27, 2024, at Grupo 4 in La Joya, Peru, after an opening ceremony ...Read more

US, Peru expand space data sharing partnership


May 20, 2020 — This agreement will give Peru access to the highest quality satellite tracking data available to assist them with PerúSat-1 and its eventual follow-on.Read more

Air Forces Southern > Home


U.S. Space Force Chief of Space Operations Gen. Chance Saltzman, visited Air Forces Southern (AFSOUTH) headquarters on Feb. 27, reinforcing the increasing ...Read more

peru bolsters international space collaboration with key u.s. ...


Jul 28, 2023 — “For example, two months ago, the Peruvian Space Agency and Peruvian Air Force just signed an agreement with the U. S. Space Command. We now ...Read more

state.gov
state.gov
Foreign Policy - Page 1128 of 1263


Japan (13-528) – Agreement Memorandum of Understanding for Sharing the Space Situational Awareness Services and Information for Safety of Space. May 28, 2013.Read more

Space - United States Department of State


... Space (UNCOPUOS) Expert Group on Space Situational Awareness. December 9 ... Depositary Actions - Treaty Affairs. Space – Outer Space Treaty – Notification of ...

Brazil (19-1216.1) - Agreement on Technology Safeguards ...


Nonproliferation: Technology Safeguards. Signed at Washington March 18 and March 26, 2019; entered into force December 16, 2019. Download Agreement [2 MB].Read more

US-Brazil Technology Safeguards Agreement (2019)


Sep 19, 2020 — Entered into force December 16, 2019. Page 2. NOTE BY THE DEPARTMENT ... Licensees involved in Launch Activities at the Alcantara Space Center to ...Read more

2019 Treaties and Agreements


Brazil (19-1216.1) – Agreement on Technology Safeguards Associated with U.S. Participation in Launches from the Alcantara Space Center. TIAS. Brazil (19-916) ...Read more

trade.gov
trade.gov
Brazil - Space Technologies and Systems


Aug 21, 2025 — This agreement allows the use of U.S. technology in space launches from Brazil ... In 2024, Brazil approved a bill that created the new ...Read more

ipdefenseforum.com
ipdefenseforum.com
Space Defense Partnerships


May 29, 2024 — These space situational awareness (SSA) agreements, written in carefully crafted legal language, typically address space launches, avoiding ...Read more

Building a combat-ready force


Feb 2, 2026 — The Operational Test and Training Infrastructure would serve as “the backbone of Space Force readiness as Guardians prepare for a high-intensity ...Read more

United in Defense


Jul 14, 2025 — In May 2020, then-USSPACECOM Commander Gen. John W. “Jay” Raymond ... 18th Space Control Squadron at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California.Read more

gao.gov
gao.gov
DOD Is Pursuing Efforts to Collaborate with Allies and ...


Jul 8, 2025 — b. These agreements allow U.S. Space Command to share space situational awareness data gathered from U.S. sensors with partner countries and ...Read more

SATELLITE CONTROL NETWORK Updating Sustainment ...


Apr 10, 2023 — GAO-23-105505 Satellite Control Network. Figure 2: Offices Involved with the Satellite Control Network. • ... the remote tracking station block ...Read more

MISSILE WARNING SATELLITES - Space Development ...


Jan 28, 2026 — The contract for the ground segment has also had to be modified due to underestimated requirements. In August 2024, the Defense Contract.

Missile Warning Satellites: Space Development Agency ...


Jan 28, 2026 — DOD is developing a new system—a large constellation of satellites—to detect and track missile threats. But its current efforts risk not ...Read more

Satellite Control Network: Updating Sustainment Plan ...


Apr 10, 2023 — User demand for SCN support runs high and is expected to increase. The utilization rate for the SCN has averaged 75 percent over the last decade ...Read more

SATELLITE CONTROL NETWORK - Updating Sustainment ...


The utilization rate for the SCN has averaged 75 percent over the last decade. This rate exceeds the 70 percent level that Space Force officials cite as the ...Read more

DOD Is Pursuing Efforts to Collaborate with Allies and ...


Jul 8, 2025 — As of April 2024, NATO officials told us ... to USSPACECOM's space situational awareness data sharing agreements with allies and partners.Read more

Updating Sustainment Plan Would Help Space Force ...


Apr 10, 2023 — SCN Capacity Challenges. Page 18. Page 14. GAO-23-105505 Satellite Control Network allowed them to save about 12 percent capacity on the SCN.Read more

GAO-25-107034, DOD SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS


Mar 4, 2025 — GAO found that while DOD tracks progress on the components of enterprise SATCOM, it lacks comprehensive reporting on progress toward these ...Read more

Highlights | MISSILE WARNING SATELLITES


GAO's report (1) describes SDA's efforts to develop and deliver missile warning and tracking capabilities; (2) identifies risks. SDA faces delivering these ...Read more

Space Acquisitions: Analysis of Two DOD Reports to ...


Mar 26, 2024 — This Q&A report discusses two reports that DOD and the Air Force, which oversees the Space Force, released in 2020 and 2022.Read more

dvidshub.net
dvidshub.net
News - Resolute Sentinel 24 concludes, strengthens global ...


Jun 17, 2024 — Held primarily in Peru, the exercise saw the involvement of over 1,500 ... Colombia, Ecuador, Chile, Brazil, France, and the United States.Read more

SSC stands up, Guetlein takes command


Aug 13, 2021 — “As we unfurl the Space Systems Command flag and begin a new chapter in space history, let's reflect on the parallels between past and present,” ...Read more

New York Air Guard space operators share best practices ...


Sep 9, 2025 — Representative from the Brazilian Space ... In 2024, U.S. Space Command announced it would embed a liaison officer at COPE to further cooperation.Read more

lexology.com
lexology.com
Space Law: Brazil


Dec 19, 2025 — Brazil has ratified and officially enacted the following United Nations space treaties by specific decrees, thus incorporating them into the ...Read more

icwa.in
icwa.in
China's Influence Over Space, Ports, and the ...


Sep 23, 2025 — For instance, in 2024, USSPACECOM strengthened its space partnerships by establishing a Space Situational Awareness (SSA) agreement with Uruguay ...Read more

uniset.ca
uniset.ca
Treaties-in-Force-2014/2015-Supplement


13-528. Agreement concerning the space situational awareness services and information sharing for the safety of space, with memorandum of understanding.Read more

stratcom.mil
stratcom.mil
USSTRATCOM, Brazil sign agreement to share space ...


Aug 20, 2018 — US Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM) signed an agreement with the Brazilian Ministry of Defense to share Space Situational Awareness (SSA) services and ...Read more

riotimesonline.com
riotimesonline.com
Brazil and Colombia Team Up with U.S. Space Force in ...


Feb 28, 2024 — From February 6 to 15, personnel from the Brazilian Air Force's Space Operations Center took part in Global Sentinel 2024.

digitalcommons.unomaha.edu
digitalcommons.unomaha.edu
Strategic Space Cooperation: U.S. Space Command and ...


by D Moore · 2024 — This engagement, involving discussions on Space. Domain Awareness and Space Situational Awareness Sharing Agreements, exemplified the strategic partnerships ...Read more

spaceforce.mil
spaceforce.mil
US Space Command hosts Global Sentinel 2025 exercise


May 6, 2025 — Building upon the success of Global Sentinel 2024, this year's event expanded participation to 29 nations and NATO, adding Chile, Denmark, ...Read more

STARCOM Guardian recognized as one of USSF's best


Dec 29, 2022 — Space Systems Command · Space Training and Readiness ... After high school, as an Elder for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints ...Read more

18th Space Defense Squadron


The 18th Space Defense Squadron (18th SDS), a component of Space Delta 2, is the US Space Force's premier Space Domain Awareness squadron.Read more

News


Jul 18, 2022 — The Space Development Agency (SDA) today announced the award of two prototype agreements with a total potential value over $1.3 billion for the establishment ...

Space Systems Command geared to deliver swift ...


Apr 8, 2021 — The Command is set to officially stand up in summer 2021 once all required conditions are met to re-designate the Space and Missile Systems ...

SPACE SYSTEMS COMMAND Launch Media Release


Mar 4, 2024 — This one-year EWS cubesat technical demonstration will prove out emerging space-based EO/IR radiometric imaging technology, using a smaller ...Read more

News - Space Systems Command


Mar 27, 2025 — Summary: Additional space launch providers are being added in FY25 to the Phase 3 Lane 1 contract, joining the three providers awarded ...Read more

U.S. Space Force achieves key design milestone for Resilient ...


U.S. Space Force achieves key design milestone for Resilient Missile Warning and Tracking Epoch 2 MEO Constellation. Published March 9, 2026; By SSC Public ...Read more

2026 - Command Plan


Jan 22, 2026 — Since I released the SSC Command Plan in October 2024, we have made significant progress in modernizing our Command structure, establishing ...

Space Systems Command Celebrates First Anniversary as ...


Aug 12, 2022 — Space Systems Command (SSC) has achieved numerous milestones in the year since it was stood up as a US Space Force (USSF) Field Command on Aug. 13, 2021.Read more

x.com
x.com
#OTD in 2022, the @Forsvarsmakten🇸🇪signed a Space ...


#OTD in 2022, the @Forsvarsmakten signed a Space Situational Awareness Memorandum of Understanding with #USSPACECOM.Read more

🚀NRL's Spacecraft Engineering Dept. launched TREx, a ...


NRL's Spacecraft Engineering Dept. launched TREx, a new service providing software dev and mission ops across the space community.Read more

A major leap for #SpaceForce antenna services! In collab ...


In collab w/the Naval Research Laboratory & Space Development Agency, we completed a demo showcasing the JAM transfer of NRL's TREx Service from ...

#USSPACECOM & Maj. Gen. Eric Cólen, 🇧🇷Space ...


Apr 11. #USSPACECOM & Maj. Gen. Eric Cólen, Space Operations Center commander, signed an arrangement to assign a Brazilian liaison officer ...Read more

zona-militar.com
zona-militar.com
The Space Operations Center of the Colombian Air Force ...


Jul 5, 2024 — The Space Operations Center of the Colombian Air Force participated in the Resolute Sentinel Exercise with the Armed Forces of Argentina, Brazil ...Read more

Noticias de la Fuerza Aérea de Perú| Página 322


Apr 25, 2006 — News | April 18, 2023. USSPACECOM, CONIDA, and the Peruvian Air Force sign SSA​. By Press Release U.S. Space Command FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE ...Read more

nasa.gov
nasa.gov
Active International Agreements by Signature Date (as of ...


Aug 31, 2023 — Implementing Arrangement/Agreement (IA). NASA and the Brazilian Space Agency (AEB) signed an IA under the U.S.-Brazil Framework Agreement on.Read more

Active International Agreements by Signature Date (as of ...


Oct 31, 2023 — Project-Specific Agreement. (PSA). This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) covers cooperation between NASA and the Italian Space. Agency (ASI) ...Read more

11.0 Ground Data Systems and Mission Operations


KSAT Punta Arenas – Supports: S/X Band — Assets: 11.5m; KSAT Inuvik ... A summary of government and commercial ground stations and antennas in Table ...Read more

12.0 Identification and Tracking Systems


Feb 5, 2025 — The US Space Force next generation SSA sensor, known as the Space Fence, was declared operational in March 2020 and can track objects below the ...Read more

Small Spacecraft Technology State of the Art 2024 report


Feb 14, 2025 — ... (government). • Sabertooth by JPL. • CHREC/SHREC Space Processor, by NSF SHREC (academic). • RadPC by Montana State University (academic). Given ...Read more

Ground Data Systems and Mission Operations chapter


Feb 11, 2025 — ... S/X Band — Assets: 7.3m/7.3m. • KSAT Punta Arenas – Supports: S/X Band — Assets: 11.5m. Figure 11.3: NSN Global Ground Station Locations.

Near Space Network Complexes


Sep 25, 2023 — Locations of Near Space Network ground stations and Track Data and Relay Satellites. ... SSC Santiago, Chile — Supports: S Band — Assets: 9m/12m/ ...Read more

Real-Time Hardware Configurable Coprocessors


Jan 22, 2026 — Through prior NASA SBIR funding, RadPC has been adapted and matured into a form that uses the emerging RISC-V CPU, implements fault-recovery ...Read more

fy 2025 president's budget request summary


... Space Station (ISS) operations, including 23 years with continuous human presence. This year, we continue to use commercial services to safely transport ...Read more

FY 2024 Budget Estimates


FY 2022 reflects funding amounts specified in Public Law 117-103, Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2022, as adjusted by NASA's FY. 2022 Operating Plan, August ...Read more

Sheet1


... aerospace research, underground infrastructure, and Space Command collaborations at DIA. ... Jehovah Designations Tier X (Above Top Secret Designation) ULTRA / ...Read more

andina.pe
andina.pe
Peru's Defense Min: Sentinel Resolute 2024 will lead to ...


May 28, 2024 — Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, and France also participate in Sentinel Resolute 2024, which is conducted in collaboration with the United ...Read more

USSPACECOM, Peruvian Air Force and CONIDA sign SSA


Apr 21, 2023 — USSPACECOM's Space Situational Awareness sharing program enhances the safety, stability, security, and sustainability of spaceflight for all.Read more

USSPACECOM, Peruvian Air Force and CONIDA sign SSA


Apr 21, 2023 — ... Peruvian Air Force Major General Jose Antonio Garcia Morgan, signed the agreement during Space Symposium 38 in Colorado Springs on April 18.Read more

kongsberg.com
kongsberg.com
Royal opening of the KSAT PUNTA ARENAS ground station


The station currently consists of 6 antennas; 2 for data reception from Earth Observation satellites and 4 gateway antennas for Iridium Communications, a long- ...Read more

Space & Surveillance: Satellite services


Kongsberg Satellite Services AS (KSAT) is a leading Norwegian provider of ground station and Earth observation services, uniquely positioned to support ...Read more

nrl.navy.mil
nrl.navy.mil
NRL's Satellite Operations Service is Ready for the Space ...


Dec 9, 2025 — ... Space Force enterprise as part of the Joint Antenna Marketplace (JAM). ... operations centers with commercial and government antennas worldwide ...Read more

NRL's Satellite Operations Service is Ready for the Space ...


Dec 9, 2025 — As of August 2025, NRL has transitioned TREx to SYD 85, where TREx will onboard additional satellite missions and serve the broader U.S. Space ...Read more

ksat.no
ksat.no
KSAT to Support NOAA's Deep Space Solar Observatory


Jun 22, 2023 — The KBR and KSAT team are developing a blended network including U.S. government ground station sites with KSAT-owned capabilities delivered as ...Read more

KSAT Selected as Provider to NASA Near Space Network ...


Dec 23, 2024 — Kongsberg Satellite Services (KSAT) has been selected by NASA to provide critical space-to-ground communication services in the Near Space Network (NSN).Read more

The KSAT Global Ground Station Network


The KSAT Global Ground Station Network consists of more than 200 antennas, and includes 25 selected locations.

NASA selects KSAT Punta Arenas station for KA-band ...


Jun 28, 2019 — KSAT is chosen by NASA to support the NiSAR and Pace satellites with Ground station as-a-service from the Punta Arenas Chilean Ground Station.Read more

KSAT and Microsoft announcing General Availability of ...


Sep 14, 2022 — KSAT is partnering with Microsoft's Azure Orbital service, to enable satellite operators to focus on their core satellite activities.Read more

Inauguration of Chilean Satellite Ground Station Punta ...


As part of the expansion of the Global Ground Network, KSAT has established a new station in Punta Arenas, Chile. Last week the station was ...Read more

Cloud Integration


We enable ground station integration with any public cloud platform provider and has capability to offer edge computing solutions at remote sites.Read more

tile.loc.gov
tile.loc.gov
ka'ena point satellite tracking station - Loc


space programs supported by the Air Force Satellite Control Network (AFSCN). KPSTS is one of eight satellite tracking stations that make up the common user ...Read more

landsat.usgs.gov
landsat.usgs.gov
Kongsberg Satellite Services AS (KSAT)


KSAT is a commercial Norwegian enterprise uniquely positioned to provide ground station services for polar orbiting satellites and global earth observation ...Read more

gps.gov
gps.gov
Resiliency through Redundancy


Sep 12, 2023 — The Alternate Master Control Station (AMCS) is located at. Vandenberg Space Force Base, California, enabling continuity of operations in the ...Read more

investor.iridium.com
investor.iridium.com
Iridium Enhances Network with New Southern Hemisphere ...


Mar 28, 2019 — The Punta Arenas site was built in partnership with Kongsberg Satellite Services (KSAT) of Norway, a long-time Iridium partner in supporting ...Read more

usafunithistory.com
usafunithistory.com
22d SPACE OPERATIONS SQUADRON


The sites and their locations are Detachment 1, Vandenberg AFB, Calif.; Detachment 2, Diego Garcia,. British Indian Ocean Territory; Detachment 3, Thule AB, ...Read more

arizona.aws.openrepository.com
arizona.aws.openrepository.com
MODERNIZING THE REMOTE TRACKING STATION


Since the inception of the Air Force Satellite Control Network (AFSCN) in ... Remote Tracking Station (ARTS) Program. This paper traces historical RTS ...Read more

nstxl.org
nstxl.org
Space Defense: Powering the Mission Through SpEC


Jan 26, 2026 — Together, Joint Antenna Marketplace (JAM), Space Mobility and ... connecting Satellite Operations Centers (SOC) to government and commercial ...Read more

SpEC Awards JAM Prototypes to Accelerate Satellite Access


Jun 9, 2025 — JAM is a secure, cloud-based scheduling system that helps connect satellite operators to the antenna resources they need, automating matches.Read more

datacenterdynamics.com
datacenterdynamics.com
AWS and KSAT sign ground station agreement - DCD


Jul 31, 2025 — Amazon Web Services (AWS) has signed a ground station-as-a-service (GSaaS) partnership with Kongsberg Satellite Services (KSAT).Read more

KSAT signs SpaceX launch contract for its Hyper ...


Dec 16, 2025 — Kongsberg Satellite Services (KSAT) has secured a launch services contract with SpaceX to deploy the first satellites of its “Hyper” ...Read more

Loft Orbital to work with US Space Force on satellite 'Edge ...


May 5, 2021 — Loft Orbital is working to develop a processor that can provide on-board Edge computing capabilities to military satellites in orbit.Read more

Amazon to invest $4bn in Chile data center region - DCD


May 7, 2025 — Amazon first entered Chile with a CloudFront Edge location in 2019. The company later launched an AWS Ground Station in Punta Arenas and ...Read more

OneWeb to place ground station at Telespazio teleport in ...


Feb 17, 2022 — Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite firm OneWeb is to place a ground station at Telespazio's teleport in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.Read more

York Space to acquire ground station as-a-service firm Atlas


Jul 24, 2025 — York Space Systems, a US defense technology company, is to acquire ground station as-a-Service (GSaaS) provider Atlas Space Operations.Read more

AWS launches South American satellite ground station


Dec 17, 2021 — The company said this week it has expanded its AWS Ground Station to its South America (São Paulo) Region with an AWS Ground Station antenna location in Punta ...Read more

Microsoft retires ground station services, sells antenna to SLI


Mar 12, 2025 — The acquired ground stations will be leased to Washington-based operator RBC Signals. The acquisition was financed by SLI through a sale-and ...Read more

kbr.com
kbr.com
KBR Expands Military Space Footprint with $40 Million in ...


Sep 25, 2019 — It supports telemetry, tracking, and command for U.S. defense space vehicles as well as selected space programs run by NASA and foreign allies.Read more

dtic.minsky.ai
dtic.minsky.ai
Satellite Control Network (SPACE) - Minsky DTIC


The antennas are distributed around the globe at seven locations -- Vandenberg Tracking Station (VTS), Diego Garcia Station (DGS), Guam Tracking Station ...Read more

sscspace.com
sscspace.com
Punta Arenas Ground Station


The Punta Arenas Ground Station is located 28 km North of the main city and is accessible via a main paved road throughout all the year. When this station is ...Read more

SSC Space announces a new optical ground station in Chile


Mar 10, 2026 — News, Press release. SSC Space announces a new Optical Ground Station (OGS) ready for operations at its site in Santiago, Chile.

SSC Space signs agreement with FMV on satellite launch ...


6 days ago — The contract is valued at SEK 209 million and lays the foundation for a national capability that will give the Swedish Armed Forces control and ...

Press release Archives


6 days ago — SSC Space announces a new Optical Ground Station (OGS) ready for operations at its site in Santiago, Chile. This cutting-edge technology, ...

Santiago Ground Station


The Santiago Ground Station is located north of Santiago in the metropolitan region of Chile, at 33º 08′ South latitude, 70º 40′ West longitude. The altitude of ...Read more

Our Ground Stations


SSC Space operates 10 ground stations strategically located around the ... Santiago Ground Station. Chile, Lat 33°08' S, Long 70°40' W. Siracha Ground ...Read more

SSC Space announces a new optical ground station in Chile


Mar 10, 2026 — SSC Space announces a new Optical Ground Station (OGS) in Chile. This cutting-edge technology offers higher data rates and enhanced ...

We are now SSC Space


Jan 29, 2026 — SSC Space announces a new Optical Ground Station (OGS) ready for operations at its site in Santiago, Chile. This cutting-edge technology, ...Read more

velosteam.com
velosteam.com
Justification Book - Velos


The Satellite Control Network (SCN), is a ... Remote Tracking Station (MTR) acquisition ... list and account for significant maintenance effort, down ...

Satellite Control Network - Velos


commercial antennas to both diversify space-ground link resources and increase capacity for spacecraft communication, modernize satellite scheduling, and ...Read more

novatel.com
novatel.com
GPS (Global Positioning System), United States


The Air Force Satellite Control Network (AFSCN) remote tracking stations provide the Master Control Station with additional satellite information to improve ...Read more

milsatmagazine.com
milsatmagazine.com
POGO Pumps Up USAF Satellite Control Network


Known as POGO-Charlie, this seventh and final Remote Tracking Station ... This is a vital asset to the Air Force Satellite Control Network, which consists of ...Read more

MilsatMagazine


The GAO also noted that the utilization rate for the SCN has averaged 75% over the last decade — exceeding the 70 percent level cited by USSF as the threshold ...Read more

Next Generation Space Defense


Jun 1, 2025 — Other organizations selected for the STEP 2.0 contract include Blue Canyon. Technologies, General Atomics, Lockheed Martin Corp., Loft Orbital ...Read more

satnews.com
satnews.com
USSF's SSC advances dynamic satellite operations Through Joint ...


SSC has selected Boecore, d/b/a Auria, and Sphinx Defense, to each develop and deploy a secure, cloud-based Joint Antenna Marketplace (JAM) prototype ...

Commercial Satellite Ground Stations in Defense Missions


Dec 17, 2025 — Building a government-owned network to handle this load is cost-prohibitive and too slow. Commercial GSaaS offers instant, pay-by-the-minute ...Read more

U.S. Space Force Awards $446.8 Million Agreement to Kratos ...


2 days ago — On Tuesday, March 17, 2026, the U.S. Space Force's Space Systems Command (SSC) awarded a $446.8 million Ground Management and Integration ...Read more

SSC Space Inaugurates Next-Generation Optical Ground ...


Mar 10, 2026 — SANTIAGO, CHILE – On Tuesday, March 10, 2026, SSC Space (Swedish Space Corporation) announced the operational readiness of its new Optical ...

ATLAS Space Operations proves operational hybrid space ...


Apr 12, 2024 — This technology allows the linking of the DoD, civil government, private agencies, and commercial satellite ground stations into a single, ...Read more

CNES Awards Loft Orbital Consortium €50M Contract for ...


Jan 22, 2026 — As the lead for the consortium, Loft Orbital is responsible for the satellite bus and the ground control segment. The mission will leverage ...Read more

Ball Aerospace, Loft Federal + Microsoft to collaborate on ...


Apr 12, 2023 — Through NExT, together the SDA and U.S. Space Force will securely operate a government owned satellite constellation with Azure Orbital Ground ...Read more

Telespazio Deploys LEO-Based Mobile Satcom for Brazil's ...


Mar 4, 2026 — The system was developed locally in Brazil in collaboration with Grupo Racco, emphasizing Leonardo's broader roadmap of strengthening regional ...Read more

SatNews – Satellite Industry Intelligence Since 1983


U.S. Space Force Awards $446.8 Million Agreement to Kratos for MEO Missile Tracking Ground Segment. On Tuesday, March 17, 2026, the U.S. Space Force's Space ...Read more

GAO Report Warns of Technological and Schedule Risks in ...


Jan 28, 2026 — On January 28, 2026, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a critical report titled “Missile Warning Satellites: Space Development ...Read more

ATLAS Space Operations Establishes South Pacific Hub with ...


Mar 11, 2026 — The project establishes American Samoa as a critical nexus for satellite ground-station services in the South Pacific, bridging a vital ...Read more

USAF Selects Ball Aerospace and Microsoft for LEO Constellation ...


The prototype effort, facilitated by the Defense Innovation Unit, will evaluate Ball Aerospace's use of Azure as the cloud platform for CASINO to leverage ...

Space Development Agency contracts for 28 satellite builds ...


Jul 18, 2022 — L3Harris Technologies (NYSE:LHX) has been awarded a contract to build the Space Development Agency's (SDA) Tranche 1 Tracking Layer satellite ...

MDA selected by L3Harris for SDA's Tranche 1 Tracking Layer ...


Jun 7, 2023 — MDA Ltd. (TSX:MDA) has been awarded a contract from L3Harris Technologies (NYSE:LHX) as part of the Space Development Agency's (SDA) Tranche ...

Space & Missile Systems Center's Re-Designation Ceremony ...


Aug 13, 2021 — The Space and Missile Systems Center has now been re-designated as Space Systems Command headquarters, officially establishing the newest ...

SDA Awards Million$$$ For Ground Control + Ops To General ...


May 30, 2022 — (NASDAQ: IRDM) have been awarded a contract by the Space Development Agency in the amount of $324,516,613, including a base amount of ...Read more

Space Systems Command (SSC) awards $211 million Space ...


Jan 5, 2025 — U.S. Space Force (USSF) Space Systems Command (SSC) has awarded a $211 million contract to Systems Planning & Analysis, Inc. to provide ...Read more

Space Development Agency Faces “Growing Pains” as PWSA ...


Mar 8, 2026 — The GAO warned that the SDA is overestimating the technology readiness of its tracking layer and lacks a unified architecture-level schedule to ...Read more

Kongsberg Satellite Services Selected by NASA for Ground ...


Jun 30, 2019 — The agreement requires KSAT to expand its Pole to Pole network with high frequency Ka-band on Svalbard and in Punta Arenas. The contract greatly ...Read more

atlasspace.com
atlasspace.com
Freedom Space's Ground Network Software Selected for ...


Jan 30, 2024 — A subsidiary of Atlas Space Operations, Freedom Space provides a cloud-based software platform used to manage satellite ground systems. Omni ...Read more

Freedom Space Technologies Awarded Contract In ...


Jan 23, 2024 — Finnish NewSpace company NorthBase and ATLAS Space Operations have partnered to enhance satellite ground station services in Finnish Lapland.Read more

ATLAS Space Operations


ATLAS Space Operations provides Secure Space Access Anytime, Anywhere. Ground Software as a Service on a global federated network.

ATLAS Space Operations Extends Global Reach with Nine ...


Jul 31, 2019 — The new ground stations cover a range of polar and equatorial locations, including: Sodankyla, Finland; Cedar, Michigan; Harmon, Guam; Mojave, ...Read more

American Samoa & ATLAS Launch New Satellite Ground ...


Mar 10, 2026 — ATLAS is building a satellite ground station in American Samoa to serve NOAA and the US Military, boosting the South Pacific's data network.

Press Release Archives


ATLAS Space Operations announced the activation of a new ground station antenna in Mwulire, Rwanda, enhancing data collection for NOAA's COSMIC-2 mission. This ...Read more

satelliteevolution.com
satelliteevolution.com
ATLAS Space Operations provides ground support for ...


Feb 22, 2024 — ATLAS Space Operations was contracted by Millennium Space Systems, a Boeing Company, to support Space Systems Command's VICTUS NOX program.Read more

SSC Space advances optical communications with new ...


Mar 10, 2026 — SSC Space has announced a new Optical Ground Station (OGS) ready for operations at its site in Santiago, Chile. This cutting-edge technology ...Read more

Kratos awarded $25 million task order for US Space ...


Jun 11, 2025 — Kratos awarded $25 million task order for US Space Force's evolved strategic SATCOM.

kratosdefense.com
kratosdefense.com
Kratos Awarded $116.7 Million Prime Contract from the ...


Nov 13, 2024 — Kratos Awarded $116.7 Million Prime Contract from the U.S. Space Development Agency for Ground System to Support Advanced Fire Control Missions.Read more

Kratos Awarded Multi-Million Dollar Ground System ...


Feb 17, 2026 — Kratos has been awarded a contract to deliver a ground segment for its customer Space Communication Technologies SPC to support the ...

SSC Space Deploys Kratos' OpenSpace® Platform in its ...


Press Release. March 2, 2026. SSC Space Deploys Kratos' OpenSpace® Platform in its New Service for LEO Missions: SSC Space Go. Share ...Read more

Newsroom


Stay up to date with the latest news, press releases, and media coverage from Kratos, a leader in technology-driven national security solutions.

connectivity.esa.int
connectivity.esa.int
Next-generation optical ground station for fast and secure ...


Mar 10, 2026 — Next-generation optical ground station for fast and secure connectivity ready to begin operations in Chile, with ESA support. LATEST NEWS. ESA's ...

businesswire.com
businesswire.com
ATLAS Space Operations Teams with Viasat to Support ...


Mar 18, 2025 — ATLAS has been contracted by Viasat, Inc. to help provide mission-critical support to ongoing and future NASA missions.

Blue Canyon Technologies to Develop Six Additional ...


Feb 24, 2021 — In late 2020, BCT and DARPA completed the bus's Critical Design Review at BCT's Satellite Constellation Factory in Lafayette, Colorado. BCT is ...

Loft Orbital Federal, LLC Awarded NASA Task Order ...


Sep 2, 2025 — This task order is for the integration, launch and on-orbit operations of a mission supporting the Fault Tolerant RISC-V Flight Computer with ...Read more

Loft Federal Appoints Space Industry Veteran Doug ...


Sep 11, 2025 — This task order is for the integration, launch and on-orbit operations of a mission supporting the Fault Tolerant RISC-V Flight Computer with ...Read more

Space Development Agency Awards L3Harris $843 Million ...


Dec 19, 2025 — The contract, valued up to $843 million, includes ground software, operations and sustainment functions. These tracking layer satellites will ...Read more

kratosspace.com
kratosspace.com
The Complicated History of US Commercial SAR: Market ...


Feb 22, 2023 — Over the next decade, commercial SAR will represent a $16.9 billion revenue opportunity and amount to nearly one-quarter of the total Earth ...Read more

Space-as-a-Service: Building an Ecosystem of Commercial ...


Sep 9, 2025 — ... Space Operations have created a kind of Airbnb for antennas using their own sites or partnerships with ground station owners. Virtually all ...Read more

Guarding the Ground: Security Implications for GSaaS


Sep 2, 2025 — Providers like AWS Ground Station, KSAT, SSC, and Atlas Space are lowering barriers for satellite operators. The model democratizes access ...Read more

Our Satellites Are like Smartphones: Loft Orbital's Alex ...


Jun 2, 2021 — Within that contract, it says that Loft Orbital an edge computer that can analyze data in space. What new capabilities does this technology ...Read more

Microsoft Azure Orbital, Ground Station as a Service, and ...


Sep 23, 2020 — The managed service lets users communicate to, control their satellite, process data and scale operations directly in Microsoft Azure.Read more

Loft Orbital Brings Software Developers to ...


Dec 13, 2023 — Loft Orbital's virtual mission framework provides a set of standard APIs that allow a customer and developer to interact with any of YAM-6's ...Read more

Episode 84 – Microsoft Azure Orbital, Ground Station as a ...


As mentioned earlier, we've also partnered with KSAT, Viasat RTE, and USEI. Their global ground stations will be available to our customers through the Orbital.

spacewatch.global
spacewatch.global
SSC Space Signs Agreement on Developing Satellite ...


4 days ago — SSC Space has signed an agreement with the Swedish Defense Materiel Administration to establish satellite launch capability from Esrange.

Ball Aerospace, Loft Federal and Microsoft to Collaborate ...


Apr 13, 2023 — Ball Aerospace are working together on the Space Development Agency (SDA)'s experimental testbed program, NExT.

SSC Space's New Optical Ground Station in Chile, Part of ...


Mar 11, 2026 — SSC Space's new Optical Ground Station at Santiago is now ready for operations, following its successful installation and acceptance ...

Telespazio Argentina Secures Contract In Costa Rica


Mar 30, 2020 — Telespazio Argentina, a subsidiary of Telespazio, was awarded a contract, following an international tender in Costa Rica to perform an urban ...

thedefensepost.com
thedefensepost.com
Northrop Grumman to Build New US Space Force Ground ...


May 6, 2025 — Northrop Grumman has signed a $244-million deal with the US Space Force (USSF) to build advanced relay ground stations in the US and UK.Read more

Loft to Lead France's First Space-Based Radar Imaging ...


Jan 23, 2026 — Loft Orbital has been selected as prime contractor for France's first space-based radar imaging demonstrator. The contract covers the ...Read more

astrogeology.usgs.gov
astrogeology.usgs.gov
SSC Space (former Swedish Space Corporation) in short


SSC Space (former Swedish Space Corporation) is a leading global provider of advanced space services, with more than 50 years of experience.

defence-industry.eu
defence-industry.eu
Kongsberg expands into space operations with successful ...


Mar 17, 2025 — Kongsberg and its subsidiaries now offer a complete satellite service, from manufacturing and ground station operations to data processing and ...Read more

mundogeo.com
mundogeo.com
SSC awarded additional ground station contracts for EU's ...


Mar 21, 2025 — Swedish Space Corporation (SSC) has been awarded several additional satellite ground station contracts by ESA for Copernicus, EU's Earth Observation program.

nasdaq.com
nasdaq.com
Kratos Defense & Security Solutions Awarded $25 Million ...


Jun 11, 2025 — Kratos Defense secured a $25 million task order from the US Space Force to enhance satellite communication systems.Read more

uppsagd.wordpress.com
uppsagd.wordpress.com
USN – SSC Chile - uppsagd


Swedish Space Corp. (SSC) has purchased a Chilean satellite ground station and its existing contracts as part of a strategy of further extending SSC's reach ...

worldteleport.org
worldteleport.org
ATLAS Space Operations receives USSF SBIR contract ...


Nov 21, 2022 — ATLAS Space Operations has been awarded a Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) contract to develop a data analytics platform for the ...Read more

Telespazio S.p.A.


Jun 1, 2025 — Company Profile: Telespazio, a joint venture between Leonardo (67%) and Thales (33%), is one of Europe's leaders and one of the world's main ...Read more

Telespazio to build OneWeb satellite gateway


Feb 15, 2022 — “In the Maricá teleport today, we started work aimed at hosting the gateways that will be operative all over Latin America by the end of the ...Read more

Teleport Operators


Telespazio, a joint venture between Finmeccanica (67%) and Thales (33%), is one of the world's leading players in satellite services. The company, headquartered ...Read more

Telespazio to Deploy Starlink in Argentina


Sep 11, 2024 — Telespazio has signed a deal to bring satellite connectivity to Patagonia in Argentina. It is working with Altec, an Argentinian technology and communications ...Read more

ARSAT


May 20, 2015 — Press Releases · Top Operators · Research · Events · Event Calendar ... ARSAT Benavidez Ground Station. Metro Area: Buenos Aires. Country ...Read more

sec.gov
sec.gov
ktos-20201227


In 2018, we received a ten-year, sole source, single award framework contract from QinetiQ UK for Kratos' MQM-178 Firejet aerial targets, spares, ground support ...Read more

20-F/A


Our optical communications terminal backlog grew significantly year-over-year from three terminal deliverables in backlog as of December 31, 2020 to 10 terminal ...Read more

comtech.com
comtech.com
Satellite & Space


Using cutting-edge technologies, we design, develop, and deliver resilient, secure all-domain communications solutions needed to support today's military ...Read more

airforce-technology.com
airforce-technology.com
Northrop boosts relay ground stations for US Space Force ...


May 6, 2025 — The US Space Force has selected Northrop Grumman to develop advanced relay ground stations within the US and the UK.

Comsat NG Military Satellite Communications System


Apr 20, 2016 — Comsat NG (next-generation) military satellite communications system is being developed to meet the military communications requirements of ...Read more

Project Blackjack: DARPA's LEO satellites take off


Jul 23, 2020 — In April 2020, Lockheed Martin was awarded a $5.8m contract for the first phase of satellite integration on DARPA's Blackjack programme.Read more

thalesgroup.com
thalesgroup.com
Earth Stations


Telemetry, Tracking and Command (TTC) and Gateway Earth stations enable secure and reliable communication between satellites and ground networks. They provide ...Read more

Thales Alenia Space and Telespazio signed a contract for ...


Dec 15, 2020 — Telespazio developed the ground segment and hosts the Constellation Control Center at the Fucino Space Center. Leonardo also contributes to the ...Read more

unoosa.org
unoosa.org
General Assembly


Feb 4, 2026 — example, under the auspices of the United Nations, in order to align and enhance coordination on space situational awareness among Member States ...

SCHEMATIC OVERVIEW OF NATIONAL REGULATORY ...


Mar 20, 2023 — The Act requires launch approval by the Minister for Science and Technology of various space activities including launches of high power rockets ...Read more

hughes.com
hughes.com
Satellite Ground Systems | Defense & Commercial | Hughes


A satellite ground network system from Hughes helps transform satellite capacity into the highest performing bandwidth, bringing critical on-demand ...Read more

systematic.com
systematic.com
Systematic, Space42, Comtech Partner for Tracking Tech


Dec 12, 2025 — Combining technology to provide superior situational awareness. “The joining of Space42's strength in space-based communications technologies, ...Read more

docs.un.org
docs.un.org
English - General Assembly - the United Nations


Feb 20, 2025 — (h) “Status and plans for space situational awareness in the Republic of. Korea”, by the representative of the Republic of Korea;. (i) ...

S/PV.8886 Security Council


Oct 21, 2021 — They are peacebuilders, change-makers and activists, defenders of human rights, decision-makers and leaders. They are mediating and negotiating.Read more

nato.int
nato.int
Satellite communications | NATO Topic


Apr 23, 2021 — Costa Rica ... The NCI Agency, with more than 100 subject matter experts and military operators, manages several satellite ground stations (SGS).Read more

NATO's overarching Space Policy | NATO Official text


Jun 27, 2019 — NATO requires space systems in the following functional areas: Space situational awareness is required to understand the operational ...Read more

janes.com
janes.com
US Navy, Space Force award key RGS, FORGE contracts


May 30, 2025 — US Navy (USN) and US Space Force (USSF) officials have awarded several key, multi-year procurement deals in support of the joint Relay Ground Station (RGS) ...Read more

airport-technology.com
airport-technology.com
Lockheed Martin's Mobile User Objective System (MUOS)


Sep 20, 2016 — The Mobile User Objective System (MUOS) is a narrow-band satellite communication system built for the US Department of Defense (DoD).Read more

smgconferences.com
smgconferences.com
Military Space Situational Awareness : Defence & Security


Apr 30, 2025 — The Leading Forum for Military Education and Training on Overcoming Key Situational Awareness Challenges in a Contested, Congested and ...Read more

Military Space Situational Awareness : Defence & Security


The 21st Annual Military Space Situational Awareness Conference returns to London from 5-7 May 2026, bringing together the global defence and space ...Read more

Military Space Situational Awareness : Defence & Security


Apr 28, 2022 — SAE Media Group are proud to present the 17th annual Military Space Situational Awareness Conference, taking place on 27th and 28th April ...Read more

vienna.usmission.gov
vienna.usmission.gov
2022 COPUOS LSC – U.S. on Space Traffic Management


Mar 29, 2022 — The United States is focused on bolstering space situational awareness and sharing space traffic coordination information.

ticotimes.net
ticotimes.net
Watch the full launch of the first satellite designed and built ...


Apr 3, 2018 — The satellite, named Project Irazú in honor of one of Costa Rican's iconic volcanoes, was built by the Central American Aeronautics and Space ...Read more

Costa Rica becomes a space watchman with powerful radar


Apr 24, 2021 — Costa Rica on Thursday inaugurated a powerful radar capable of detecting objects as small as 2 centimeters transiting in low Earth orbit.Read more

amostech.com
amostech.com
Trends in Global Space Situational Awareness Makena ...


by M Young · 2021 · Cited by 4 — As part of this agreement, the South Korean Ministry of Defense agreed to provide satellite position and radio-frequency information to U.S. Strategic Command.Read more

Joint Commercial Operations (JCO) Introduction and Way ...


by B Golf · 2024 · Cited by 9 — The 19 SDS provides space domain awareness products and services in support of various missions under U.S.. Space Command, which include expanding cislunar ...Read more

LeoLabs Worldwide Network of Radars


by J Rowland · 2021 · Cited by 16 — The most recent addition to LeoLabs' network is the Cost Rica Space Radar (CRSR) commissioned on April 22nd,. 2021 in Guanacaste, Costa Rica. The East facing ...Read more

news.co.cr
news.co.cr
First Costa Rican Satellite will be Launched April 2


Costa Rica will launch on April 2 its first satellite to the International Space Station from Cape Canaveral, Florida, U.S.A..Read more

Costa Rica Inaugurates the Most Advanced Space Radar ...


LeoLabs, a US company, inaugurated in Costa Rica a radar capable of detecting space objects as small as a golf ball. It is one of the most advanced of its kind.Read more

2021-2025.state.gov
2021-2025.state.gov
The Space Force's Critical Role in National Security


May 9, 2024 — The U.S. Space Force turns '5' this year. Lt. Gen Miller discusses the Space Force's critical role in national security, its function in ...Read more

19 1216.1 Nonproliferation (Technology Safeguards) Brazil ...


Content in this archive site is NOT UPDATED, and links may not function. For current information, go to www.state.gov.Read more

latamspacemonitor.substack.com
latamspacemonitor.substack.com
Latin America Space Roundup: 25 April to 8 May 2025


At Global Sentinel 2025, held at Vandenberg Space Force Base, the United States Space Command convened nearly 30 countries, including Brazil, ...Read more

climate-diplomacy.org
climate-diplomacy.org
Escazú at 2: Major challenges for landmark environmental ...


Apr 11, 2023 — The Escazú Agreement is open to all 33 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, of which 25 have signed up, but only 15 have since ratified.

leolabs.space
leolabs.space
LeoLabs Announces Next-Generation Expeditionary Radar ...


Apr 4, 2025 — In March, SpaceWERX, the innovation arm of the U.S. Space Force, selected LeoLabs for a $60 million Strategic Funding Increase (STRATFI) ...Read more

LeoLabs Announces Costa Rica Space Radar “ ...


“Only nine months after breaking ground in Costa Rica, it is gratifying to announce full operational status for the most advanced commercial ...Read more

Press Release Archives - Page 3 of 4


Press Release · LeoLabs Announces Costa Rica Space Radar “Fully Operational” · Press Release / By Aaron Herbach. April 22, 2021—Menlo Park, CA — LeoLabs, Inc ...Read more

lockheedmartin.com
lockheedmartin.com
MUOS: Satellite Communications System


MUOS is a network of orbiting satellites and relay ground stations that is revolutionizing secure communications for mobile forces.Read more

latimes.com
latimes.com
Pentagon to create new command for fighting in space, but ...


Aug 8, 2018 — More than 6,000 personnel are based at the Air Force's Space and Missile Systems Center ... FILE - A woman shares Jehovah's Witnesses ...Read more

Space Force acquisitions division will be based in L.A. area


Apr 8, 2021 — The division that will develop and buy space technologies and services, will be based in the Los Angeles area, officials announced Thursday.Read more

reddit.com
reddit.com
A UFO researcher predicts that aliens will officially appear ...


US Space Systems Command has identified 2026 as an extremely critical date for the defense of Earth and to maintain access to space ...Read more

Luis Elizondo Is A Contractor For The US Space Force


... contractor for the US Space Force. The Liberation Times ... Jehovah's Witnesses, a community for support, recovery and a few ...Read more

Anyone else still believe in Jehovah but not in the ...


1 Sam 24: Jehovah kills 70,000 uninvolved Israelites because David chose for god to kill them instead of punishing him .. I don't miss that ...Read more

spacewar.com
spacewar.com
South Korea offers alternative to conscription


Oct 25, 2020 — But over the decades tens of thousands of conscientious objectors, many of them Jehovah's Witnesses ... US Space Force contracts for 8 missile ...Read more

tjaglcs.army.mil
tjaglcs.army.mil
Military Law Review


In fact, the Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center ultimately awarded one of ... labor leaders, homosexuals, Jehovah's Witnesses, and, in large numbers,.Read more

apnews.com
apnews.com
Pentagon's AI initiatives accelerate decisions on lethal ...


Nov 25, 2023 — Jehovah's Witnesses ease policy on transfusions, allowing ... Wallace 'Rhet' Turnbull of Space Systems Command told a conference in August.Read more

What to know about the US military's Pituffik Space Base in ...


Mar 28, 2025 — Jehovah's Witnesses ease policy on transfusions, allowing storage and use of one's own blood ... U.S. Space Force. The base is locked in by ice ...Read more

ldrg.files.wordpress.com
ldrg.files.wordpress.com
GUIDE TO THE ASSHOLES OF LOS ANGELES AN


Three. Jehovah's Witnesses in shabby dress clothes wait to bring me news that ... Home to U.S. Space And Missile Systems Center, notorious for seeking a ...Read more

kirtland.af.mil
kirtland.af.mil
The Holocaust: What does it mean?


May 6, 2011 — Space Systems Command · Kirtland Air Force Base Fire Department · News ... 􀁑 In addition to Jews, the Nazis targeted Gypsies, homosexuals, ...Read more

docs.elsegundo.org
docs.elsegundo.org
CC RESOLUTION 5032 - Public Records - El Segundo


Jun 12, 2017 — ... Space and Missile Systems Center, is located within the city. LAAFB ... Jehovah's Witnesses High Potential Loss Facility Evacuation ...Read more

2017 Apr 18 - CC PACKET - Public Records - El Segundo


Apr 13, 2017 — ... Space and Missile Systems Center, is located within the city. LAAFB ... Jehovah's Witnesses High Potential Loss Facility Evacuation ...Read more

heyhumanpodcast.com
heyhumanpodcast.com
Humans


... Space Systems Command, one of three U.S. Space Force field commands. We chatted about what his role is within Space Force, what Space Force is, and I asked ...Read more

Hey Human Podcast


... Space Systems Command, one of three U.S. Space Force field commands. We chatted about what his role is within Space Force, what Space Force is, and I asked ...Read more

mcdonaldhopkins.com
mcdonaldhopkins.com
Daniel E. Schoeni


Sep 25, 2025 — ... Space Systems Command at Los Angeles AFB, California. In addition to ... Missionary, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Monterrey ...Read more

gangstalkingmindcontrolcults.com
gangstalkingmindcontrolcults.com
Treason at the Air Force Space Command at Schriever ...


Aug 29, 2019 — ... Space and Missile Systems Center, Detachment 11; 11th Space Warning ... They tried to brainwash me to become a scientologist, illuminati, ...Read more

cr.linkedin.com
cr.linkedin.com
200+ perfiles de «Sandra Mcintosh»


United States Space Force / Space Systems Command y 2 más. University of ... Jehovah Witness Minister. Middletown, NY. Bible Student ...Read more

meta-defense.fr
meta-defense.fr
European military planning has been obsolete since 2022 ...


Apr 1, 2025 — The fact is, it's a bit like the advent of Armageddon for Jehovah's Witnesses, or the Messiah for the Raelians, it's always in the next 6 to 12 ...Read more

survivorbb.rapeutation.com
survivorbb.rapeutation.com
View topic - Neuschwanstein: A fairy tale darling's dark Nazi past


Sep 21, 2019 — ... Space and Missile Systems Center, and Air Force Materiel Command. ... Jehovah's Witnesses whose beliefs preclude them from pledging ...Read more

apsattv.com
apsattv.com
Apsattv.com


Jung Ha, senior materiel leader for the GPS Space Vehicles Acquisition Delta at Space Systems Command. “The spacecraft is healthy and all systems are go ...Read more

d34w7g4gy10iej.cloudfront.net
d34w7g4gy10iej.cloudfront.net
THIS WEEK


Latter-day Saints. 5) Full Gospel Church. 6) New ... Notice of Availability U.S. Space Force – Space Systems Command Flight Tests Final ... Imejatoto an Space ...

prussianroyalfamily.com
prussianroyalfamily.com
1977 Lord Jesus Christ


Jehovah's Witnesses :) · :) Jehovah's Witnesses · Crowned By The Sea · His ... 2025 NEW LOGISTICS CULTURE United States Space Force Space Systems Command. Picture.Read more

fdd.org
fdd.org
July 30, 2021


Jul 30, 2021 — A court in southern Russia has sentenced three Jehovah's Witnesses ... The U.S. Space Force launched a new experimental satellite July 29 ...Read more

jwtalk.net
jwtalk.net
All Things Personal Finance - Page 7


May 24, 2023 — US Space Force Major urges Defense Department to adopt Bitcoin as an ... Jehovah's Witnesses. We are a pro-JW community maintained by ...Read more

aerospacedefensereviewapac.com
aerospacedefensereviewapac.com
Ball Aerospace and Microsoft to Demonstrate Cloud ...


4 days ago — Ball Aerospace and Microsoft to Demonstrate Cloud Processing Capabilities for U.S Air Force's CASINO Project. The demonstration will aim to show ...Read more

prnewswire.com
prnewswire.com
Ball Aerospace-Microsoft Team Completes Demonstrations ...


May 19, 2021 — During the demonstration, the CASINO team proved that we are ready to field low-latency links today, which moves this vision much closer to ...Read more

Ball Aerospace, Loft Federal and Microsoft to Collaborate ...


Apr 11, 2023 — Team consisting of Ball Aerospace, Loft Federal and Microsoft will deliver 10 experimental Space Development Agency payloads to orbit.Read more

LeoLabs Announces Costa Rica Space Radar "Fully ...


Apr 22, 2021 — "Only nine months after breaking ground in Costa Rica, it is gratifying to announce full operational status for the most advanced commercial ...Read more

SEAKR Awarded Pit Boss Contract To Develop Advanced ...


Oct 10, 2019 — (SEAKR) is pleased to announce it has been awarded a Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Pit Boss contract supporting the ...Read more

General Dynamics Mission Systems and Iridium Awarded ...


May 26, 2022 — (NASDAQ: IRDM) announced today that they have been awarded a contract by the Space Development Agency in the amount of $324,516,613, including a ...Read more

General Dynamics Mission Systems Awarded $491.6 ...


Sep 4, 2024 — Under this contract, General Dynamics will work with SDA and key stakeholders to develop and deliver a Tranche-agnostic ground system for PWSA.Read more

aerospacedefenserevieweurope.com
aerospacedefenserevieweurope.com
Ball Aerospace and Microsoft to Demonstrate Cloud ...


Ball Aerospace and Microsoft to Demonstrate Cloud Processing Capabilities for U.S Air Force's CASINO Project. The demonstration will aim to show how ...Read more

dailymotion.com
dailymotion.com
How beating the casino actually works, according to a former ...


I led a card counting team that won tens of millions of dollars from casinos at blackjack tables.

veritaglobal.net
veritaglobal.net
1074617110214000000000020.pdf


Feb 14, 2011 — List of Rejected Executory Contracts and Unexpired Leases (Exhibit. A);. 2. List of Retained Contracts (Exhibit B);.Read more

news.microsoft.com
news.microsoft.com
Azure Space – cloud-powered innovation on and off the ...


Oct 22, 2020 — The U.S Defense and Innovation Unit (DIU) chose Microsoft and Ball Aerospace to create more actionable space data and re-imagine ground station ...Read more

linknovate.com
linknovate.com
Experts for Pa Dallas Marie Bowe


Linknovate, experts for Pa Dallas Marie Bowe. Peek into the next innovations and research in Pa Dallas Marie Bowe, and the companies and universities behind ...

boston.lti.cs.cmu.edu
boston.lti.cs.cmu.edu
56 about 57 community 58 yahoo 59 texas 60 car 61 parts ...


... air 129 medical 130 movie 131 videos 132 internet 133 tickets 134 lake 135 ... casino 264 it 265 red 266 prices 267 @ 268 channel 269 great 270 or 271 ...Read more

ad-teaching.informatik.uni-freiburg.de
ad-teaching.informatik.uni-freiburg.de
https://ad-teaching.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/Inf...


... program 5890 century 5836 himself 5824 paper 5812 if 5808 ii 5799 america ... air 2744 bank 2742 1938 2705 sent 2700 division 2692 stanford 2688 ...Read more

tealgroup.com
tealgroup.com
Ball Aerospace & Technologies Corp.


Strategy: The aerospace segment owned by Ball Corporation is a well- established supplier of advanced space and technology-related solu-.Read more

data.longevity.international
data.longevity.international
Longevity Industry Landscape Overview Volume II


This present volume, entitled “The Business of Longevity”, outlines the commercial side of this emerging industry. It describes the novel financial system that ...Read more

downey-n1.cs.northwestern.edu
downey-n1.cs.northwestern.edu
word_list.txt


... air-cooled most-likely 40402 Chittagong Directorship Tariff 24936 Bitche ... Casino Bironas successfully players Uele narayana Vinny Bellevaux 25087 ...Read more

jstor.org
jstor.org
Inside the Air Force


by C Albon · 2021 — SMC's Commercially Augmented. Space ... CASINO is also working closely with other space program offices and operational users to identify opportunities to.Read more

wwt.com
wwt.com
Streamlining IT Complexity Improves Tribal Casino Gaming ...


The problem. The back office team of a leading tribal casino was experiencing significant latency and connectivity issues that were affecting gaming operations.Read more

scribd.com
scribd.com
CSE Course Catalogue Detailed Syllabus | PDF


Introduction: Introduction to Computer Science; Computer Algorithms; Computer Hardware; Computer Software; The process of Computational Problem Solving;Read more

1944 The Watchower Announcing Jehovah's Kingdom | PDF


... Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, synod, or council of ministers.' It has been the practice of of NewYork city; and from this servant the Lord's wit ...Read more

Aapd0022 DL | PDF | Port | Infrastructure


AAPA SEAPORTS OF THE AMERICAS. 2022 MEMBERSHIP DIRECTORY. SEAPORTS of the Americas. AAPA. THE AUTHORITATIVE AND COMPREHENSIVE GUIDE TO THE SEAPORTS,.Read more

DARAPA60 - Publication CP PDF | PDF | Darpa


72 DEFENSE ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY I 60 YEARS. DARPA's Blackjack program might provide the means to transition many of today's national security ...Read more

vernonia.biblionix.com
vernonia.biblionix.com
Titles owned by Vernonia Public Library - Biblionix


Titles owned by Vernonia Public Library. This document is primarily intended for consumption by computers. The catalog interface designed for people can be ...Read more

events.teams.microsoft.com
events.teams.microsoft.com
Webinar: Securing the Casino Floor


Casinos face increasing challenges when it comes to controlling access to gaming equipment, cages, restricted doors, and other critical areas.Read more

science.gov
science.gov
educational card game: Topics by ...


Popular gambling choices include games known to be associated with risk (cards, horse races, sports betting, casino games, and gaming machines) as well as lotto ...Read more

htv-prod-media.s3.amazonaws.com
htv-prod-media.s3.amazonaws.com
Maryland Small Business COVID-19 Emergency Relief ...


Initial Form - State. (Business). Grant Amount Type. Del-Mar-Va Council. Del-Mar-Va Council, Boy Scouts of America. Dover. Z. Out-of-State. Delaware.Read more

iaea.org
iaea.org
The Text of the Safeguards Transfer Agreement ...


No information is available for this page.

A. Safeguards Statement for 2019


A safeguards conclusion that all nuclear material has remained in peaceful activities in a State is based on the Agency's finding that there are no indications ...

ibanet.org
ibanet.org
Aerospace exploration in Brazil: the Alcântara Space Center


Seeking to make the economic exploration of the Alcântara Base feasible, on 18 March 2019, Brazil signed the Technology Safeguards Agreement with the United ...Read more

en.unav.edu
en.unav.edu
Brazil attracts space operators to its Alcantara launch site


The treaty signed between the two allows the Brazilian Space Agency to only launch from the base those rockets, satellites or spacecraft that count U.S. ...Read more

Brazil relaunches its space industry by opening the Alcantara ...


The Technology Safeguards agreement is mainly a commercial agreement in order to attract more U.S. companies to Brazil for the Alcantara site, which would ...Read more

digitalcommons.unl.edu
digitalcommons.unl.edu
THE 2001 BRAZll..1AN NATIONAL SPACE LAW The ...


by FG von der Dunk · 2002 — the Brazilian National Congress to approve a similar Safeguard Agreement between the United States and Brazil of. April 2000 relating to participation of US.

fach.mil.cl
fach.mil.cl
Fuerza Aérea de Chile participa en Global Sentinel 2025 ...


May 9, 2025 — Es así como además de Estados Unidos, también estuvieron presentes Alemania, Australia, Bélgica, Brasil, Canadá, Chile, Colombia, Finlandia, ...Read more

mattosfilho.com.br
mattosfilho.com.br
Brazilian Space Agency issues a public call for companies ...


Jul 21, 2020 — Seeking to make the economic exploration of the Alcântara Base feasible, on March 18, 2019, Brazil signed the Technology Safeguards Agreement ...Read more

unav.edu
unav.edu
Brazil relaunches its space industry by opening the ...


The Bolsonaro administration has accepted the Technological Safeguards Agreement with the USA, an agreement that has evaded Washington before the Workers Party ...

safia.hq.af.mil
safia.hq.af.mil
US Space Command hosts Global Sentinel 2025 exercise


May 6, 2025 — Participants for GS25 include: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Finland, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway ...Read more

yris.yira.org
yris.yira.org
The Space Force And The Alcantara Safeguard Agreement ...


Nov 25, 2020 — Accordingly, the Alcantara Launch Center (ALC) ... With this in mind, in 2019 Brazil and the U.S. signed the Alcantara Safeguard Agreement.Read more

sbda.org.br
sbda.org.br
Revista Brasileira de Direito Aeronáutico e Espacial


The Discussion in the Brazilian National Congress of the Brazil-USA Agreement on Technology Safeguards Relating to the Use of Alcantara Spaceport. José ...

voanews.com
voanews.com
Brazil to Sign Accord with US on Space Technology Next ...


Mar 11, 2019 — The United States and Brazil have negotiated an accord to safeguard U.S. space technology the South American nation hopes will be used in ...Read more

upload.wikimedia.org
upload.wikimedia.org
Brazil, the United States, and the missile technology control ...


(4) The United States turned down a Brazilian contract offered to Honeywell ... United States has emphasized security concerns in a primarily military ...

spaceforces-space.mil
spaceforces-space.mil
Global Sentinel 25 Mid-Planning Conference


Nov 27, 2024 — The MPC brought together 80 participants from 29 countries both in-person and virtually to discuss an upcoming Capstone event scheduled to begin in April 2025.Read more

peru bolsters international space collaboration with key u.s. ...


Jul 28, 2023 — With this agreement, Peru is poised to elevate its space capabilities and contribute to international space safety and sustainability. “Exercise ...Read more

nortonrosefulbright.com
nortonrosefulbright.com
Getting to launch: Navigating regulation in the global space ...


For example, under a Technology Safeguards Agreement between Australia and the United States, which entered into force on 23 July 2024, there is a mandated ...Read more

reuters.com
reuters.com
Brazil Senate approves technology safeguard agreement ...


Nov 12, 2019 — The technology safeguard agreement (TSA) opens room for U.S. companies interested in launching small satellites at a lower cost from the ...

US expands Golden Dome cost estimate to $185 billion, enlists top defense firms


The U.S. government's Golden Dome missile defense program has increased its cost estimate to $185 billion—$10 billion higher than previously—primarily to expedite advanced space-based defense capabilities. The project now includes leading defense contractors Lockheed Martin, RTX, and Northrop Grumman as prime partners. Golden Dome integrates both ground-based systems like interceptor missiles, sensors, and command-and-control infrastructure with new space-based elements to improve detection and defense against increasingly sophisticated threats, including hypersonic and ballistic missiles. Notably, the additional funding will support the Advanced Missile Tracking Initiative, a space data network, and the Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking Space Sensor (HBTSS). General Michael Guetlein emphasized the unique architecture of Golden Dome, contesting projections that estimated costs could soar beyond $1 trillion, arguing those are based on unsuitable comparative models. He also highlighted the key role of a nine-company consortium overseeing development, which includes the option to remove underperforming members. Space-based interceptors are seen as the program’s highest-risk feature due to concerns over scalability and cost-efficiency. Promising technologies such as directed energy weapons and next-generation AI are expected to help reduce operational costs and enhance performance capabilities. Full deployment of the system is expected over the coming decade.

cebri.org
cebri.org
Keep it up, keep it going


Negotiate a new Technology Safeguard Agreement between Brazil and the. United States for the use of the Alcantara space-launch base located on Brazil's.

tom-walkinshaw-wmb4.squarespace.com
tom-walkinshaw-wmb4.squarespace.com
18th Space Control Squadron Small Satellite Support


Space Situational Awareness Sharing. • Basic services are available to any person or organization with an account on www.space-track.org. • What we can do ...Read more

loftorbital.com
loftorbital.com
Announcing Loft's $170M Series C


Jan 14, 2025 — We are thrilled to announce that the mission continues with our $170M Series C, led by Tikehau Capital with Axial Partners as a co-lead, and joined by ...Read more

Loft Selected as a Prime Contractor for France's First ...


Jan 21, 2026 — This contract is aligned with DGA and French Space Command initiatives to foster a more agile defense space ecosystem, notably through the ...Read more

Loft Orbital: Space Made Simple - Loft Orbital


Loft builds space infrastructure to let any company, government, or institution harness the benefits of space. Learn more about our offerings.Read more

CatGPT: Our First Step Toward a Global Mesh Network


Dec 23, 2024 — At Loft, we design our space infrastructure to define, develop, and deploy missions in a simple, fast, and reliable manner.Read more

Virtual Missions with Microsoft Azure Space


Dec 11, 2023 — Virtual Missions with Microsoft Azure Space | Microsoft Azure Blog. News. Share this article. Latest news. Loft and SmartSat CRC Partner to ...Read more

Little Place Labs and Loft team up to compute real-time ...


Aug 7, 2024 — Little Place Labs is announcing that we are teaming up with Loft Orbital (Loft) to push the boundaries of real-time data processing and insight delivery.Read more

aws.amazon.com
aws.amazon.com
AWS Expands Ground Station as a Service Partner Program


Feb 24, 2026 — This collaboration enables KSAT to provide a more scalable, resilient, and globally connected ground network, serving a wider range of satellite ...Read more

AWS Ground Station as a Service


AWS Ground Station is a fully managed service that lets you control satellite communications, process data, and scale your operationsRead more

In the works – AWS South America (Chile) Region


May 7, 2025 — The AWS South America (Chile) Region will consist of three Availability Zones at launch, bringing AWS infrastructure and services closer to customers in Chile.Read more

Próximamente – Región de AWS América del Sur (Chile)


May 7, 2025 — AWS Local Zone en Santiago ayuda a los clientes a entregar aplicaciones que requieren latencia para los usuarios finales de un solo dígito de ...Read more

AWS Ground Station Launches a New Antenna Location in ...


Dec 16, 2021 — Discover more about what's new at AWS with AWS Ground Station Launches a New Antenna Location in Punta Arenas in Preview.

payloadspace.com
payloadspace.com
Loft Orbital Wins €50M Contract to Build French SAR Sat


Jan 21, 2026 — French satellite manufacturer Loft Orbital landed a nearly €50M ($58.6M) contract from the French military to deliver the country's first ...Read more

Impact of In-Space Relay Networks on Ground Station as a ...


Sep 25, 2024 — Ground station service 101: After a satellite captures data in space, the operator must transmit it to a ground station on Earth for processing.Read more

Slingshot Wins Contract to Detect GPS Jamming and ...


Jan 15, 2025 — The contract from Space Systems Command follows a $1.9M Phase 1 contract awarded ... Loft Orbital Wins €50M Contract to Build French SAR Sat.

York Space Systems Delivers Tranche 1 SDA Sats


Aug 25, 2025 — York's transport layer sats are the product of a $382M contract the company won in 2022. They are built on York's LX-CLASS platform, and are ...Read more

SDA Awards $3.5B in Tranche 3 Tracking Layer Contracts


Dec 22, 2025 — The Space Development Agency awarded $3.5B in contracts on Friday to continue building the Proliferated Warfighter Space Architecture ...

defensescoop.com
defensescoop.com
Space Force taps 12 vendors to host future emerging tech ...


May 1, 2025 — The STEP 2.0 IDIQ contract has a ceiling of $237 million, and the Space Force expects the first delivery order to begin in January 2026.Read more

Supply chain woes further delay launch of SDA's first ...


Mar 10, 2025 — The Space Development Agency has once again pushed back the launch of its Tranche 1 satellites, this time to summer 2025.

York Space Systems lands contract to build T1DES ...


Oct 6, 2022 — The Other Transaction Authority prototype agreement, worth up to $200 million, is for the development, manufacture, test, launch integration, ...Read more

Space Force stands up third 'system delta' acquisition unit ...


Aug 19, 2025 — Following the stand-up of SYD 85, the Space Force intends to activate five more system deltas before the end of the year that each focus on ...

SDA taps General Dynamics to build out ground ...


Jun 22, 2023 — The first tranche with accessible warfighting capabilities, Tranche 1, is scheduled to launch in September 2024. General Dynamics Mission ...Read more

Space Development Agency accelerates launch of first ...


Jun 24, 2025 — In 2022, York Space Systems received a $200 million other transaction agreement from SDA to develop and deliver 12 T1DES platforms that were ...Read more

Space Force advances towards operationalizing ...


Jan 27, 2026 — The Commercial Space Office is entering the next phase of the Commercial Augmentation Space Reserve Program aimed at delivering a minimal viable ...Read more

azure.microsoft.com
azure.microsoft.com
New Azure Space products enable digital resiliency and ...


Sep 14, 2022 — Working with Microsoft, KSAT demonstrated how an existing customer, Loft Orbital, can test and onboard to Azure Orbital Ground Station and ...Read more

Ground processing with space data 5x faster with Azure


May 19, 2021 — Microsoft-Ball Aerospace team demonstrates a new method of space analytics. This project represents a huge leap forward in reducing the time ...

Azure updates | Microsoft Azure


Azure Orbital is a fully managed cloud-based ground station as a service that enables you to communicate with your spacecrafts or satellite constellations, ...Read more

Azure Orbital Ground Station | Microsoft Azure Blog


Azure Orbital, a managed ground station service, enables customers to communicate to, control their satellite, process data, and scale operations directly in ...Read more

space.com
space.com
US Space Force awards $13.7 billion in launch contracts to ...


Apr 7, 2025 — The contracts cover "Phase 3 Lane 2" national-security missions, which loft the "most demanding, least risk-tolerant payloads," Space Force ...Read more

Go Centaur! Space Force stands up rocket stage at Los ...


Nov 6, 2024 — A towering propellant tank and its rocket engine now stand on display at Los Angeles Air Force Base as a testament to its service to both the United States' ...Read more

evertiq.com
evertiq.com
France selects Loft as contractor for space-based SAR ...


Jan 23, 2026 — This contract is aligned with DGA and French Space Command initiatives to foster a more agile defense space ecosystem, notably through the Pacte ...Read more

ssci.com
ssci.com
DARPA's Blackjack Jumps Forward With Payload, Bus ...


Jun 15, 2020 — On June 9, DARPA awarded a $16.4 million contract to SA Photonics ... Loft Orbital will be charged with integrating “the Sagittarius-A ...Read more

DARPA Pit Boss Contractors SEAKR and SSCI Team with ...


Jun 15, 2020 — Each flight aims to verify and validate key technologies to be integrated into Blackjack satellites, to include high-speed supercomputing, ...Read more

How Project Blackjack is turning the corner


Jun 26, 2020 — With Blackjack, DARPA wants to demonstrate the military utility of a large constellation of small satellites operating in low earth orbit.Read more

highergov.com
highergov.com
Loft Orbital Solutions


Loft Orbital builds software and hardware products to fly and operate any payload on a standard satellite bus. See how we're making space simple.Read more

RFP - Space Test Experiments Platform (STEP) 2.0 6


The STEP 2.0 IDIQ contract vehicle provides the ability to execute DOs aligning payload (PL), Space Vehicle (SV), and Launch Vehicle (LV) schedules with on- ...Read more

FA864921P0786


Contract FA864921P0786 Awardee Loft Orbital ... Space Systems Command (SSC) [DoD - USAF - USSF] ... The contract has a duration of 4 years and was awarded ...

Transmit Receive Enterprise (TREx) Service


On 6/18/24 Naval Research Laboratory issued Sources Sought N00173-24-RFI-CT02 for Transmit/Receive Enterprise (TREx) Service due 7/2/24.

SDA Tranche 1 Operations & Integration (O&I) 3


SDA Tranche 1 Operations & Integration (O&I) HQ085022C0007 was awarded to General Dynamics Mission Systems on 5/27/22 by Space Development Agency.

Contract HQ085022C0007 General Dynamics Mission ...


May 26, 2022 — Definitive Contract HQ085022C0007 worth up to $1.2B was awarded to General Dynamics Mission Systems on 5/26/22 by the the Department of the ...

rcpmag.com
rcpmag.com
Microsoft Cites Partner Support with Azure Orbital Ground ...


Sep 15, 2022 — Microsoft commercially released an Azure Space groundstation product and cited partner efforts to virtualize satellite network technologies.

research.contrary.com
research.contrary.com
Report: Loft Orbital Business Breakdown & Founding Story


Oct 9, 2025 — From 2021 to 2025, Loft Orbital has signed more than $500 million in contracts with customers including NASA, the US Space Force, Microsoft, and ...Read more

govconwire.com
govconwire.com
Loft Orbital Secures $170M in Series C Funding Round


Jan 15, 2025 — Space infrastructure provider Loft Orbital has raised $170 million in a round of Series C financing led by Tikehau Capital and Axial Partners.Read more

Astrion's Axient Business Wins Spot on $237M Space ...


Jun 19, 2025 — Astrion's Axient subsidiary will compete for task orders under the STEP 2.0 contract to build modular satellites for the Space Force.

CACI to Deliver Satellite Terminals to DARPA for Blackjack ...


Feb 15, 2022 — The deal in support of DARPA's Blackjack program was awarded to SA Photonics, which was acquired by CACI in December. Todd Probert, president of ...Read more

SEAKR Engineering Wins DARPA Contract to Continue ...


Mar 15, 2021 — SEAKR Engineering has won a two-year, $60.5 million contract to further develop supercomputing processing hardware in the next phases of a ...Read more

Kratos Lands $447M Space Force OTA for Resilient MWT ...


2 days ago — Kratos secured a $447 million Space Force OTA to support MEO missile warning launches, operations and real-time data delivery.

Lockheed, York Space Systems Land $282M in SDA ...


Sep 1, 2020 — The Space Development Agency has awarded Lockheed Martin (NYSE: LMT) and York Space Systems contracts worth $281.5M combined to provide space vehicles.Read more

SDA Awards $1.8B in Tranche 1 Transport Layer Prototype ...


Mar 1, 2022 — SDA awarded a prototype agreement worth about $700 million to Lockheed and another agreement valued at $692 million to Northrop. York Space ...Read more

L3Harris, SpaceX Book $343M in Contracts to Build Missile ...


Oct 6, 2020 — L3Harris secured a $193.6M contract while SpaceX received a $149.2M award to deliver their respective spacecraft and optical wide field of view ...

Parsons Awarded $55M SSC Contract for Missile Warning ...


May 17, 2023 — Parsons has secured a $55 million contract from Space Systems Command to help operate and integrate satellites for missile warning, tracking ...

Space Systems Command


Tecolote Research has secured a U.S. Space Force contract worth $148.1 million to provide acquisition and financial consulting support and related services for ...Read more

Space Systems Command Issues Draft RFP for HADES ...


Jan 29, 2026 — Space Systems Command released a draft RFP for the HADES contract and is seeking industry feedback on data rights, PWS structure and scope.

arxiv.org
arxiv.org
The LOFT Ground Segment


https://arxiv.org/abs/1408.6541

Optimal Ground Station Selection for Low-Earth Orbiting ...


Mar 2, 2025 — The approach is applied to optimize the station selection across six current GSaaS providers—Atlas Space Operations, AWS Ground Station, Azure ...Read more

Enhancing Fault-Tolerant Space Computing


by K Yun · 2025 — Abstract— Future planetary exploration missions demand high-performance, fault-tolerant computing to enable autonomous Guidance, Navigation ...Read more

edgeir.com
edgeir.com
Space Force contract lifts Loft Orbital edge computing ...


May 12, 2021 — ... edge computer processor that will function as a brain on Loft Orbital spacecraft ... edge AI | edge computing | Loft Orbital | US Space Force ...Read more

einpresswire.com
einpresswire.com
Loft Orbital to Work with US Space Force to Develop Satellite ...


... Loft Orbital ... This space edge processor allows individual satellites to act as computing ... processor based on US Space Force feedback from Phase I.

Loft Orbital to Work with US Space Force to Develop ...


May 5, 2021 — Under this contract, Loft Orbital will develop its next-generation onboard processor to support customer and third party “massless payloads” ...Read more

realcleardefense.com
realcleardefense.com
Loft Orbital Space Force Contract for Edge Computing


May 5, 2021 — Loft Orbital announced May 5 it won a small business innovation research (SBIR) contract from the US Space Force to support the development of an edge computer.Read more

GAO Report on Missile Warning Satellites


Feb 4, 2026 — DOD is developing a new system—a large constellation of satellites—to detect and track missile threats. But its current efforts risk not ...Read more

vialite.com
vialite.com
Next Generation Space Defense May 2021


May 17, 2021 — Under this contract, Loft Orbital will develop its next- generation onboard processor to support customer and third party “massless payloads” ...Read more

washingtontechnology.com
washingtontechnology.com
Space Force picks a dozen for $237M tech development ...


May 2, 2025 — The Space Test Experiments Platform 2.0 contract will see awardees compete for delivery orders to build the platforms, which could include ...Read more

muonspace.com
muonspace.com
A growing mission portfolio and launch manifest mark ...


Feb 3, 2026 — Awarded a $44.6 million U.S. Space Force SBIR Phase III OTA in 2025 to demonstrate a dual-use environmental monitoring constellation ... contract ...Read more

nationalacademies.org
nationalacademies.org
Appendix E: Report of the Panel on Space Weather ...


Single event effect (SEE) damage can occur when energetic protons penetrate to the memory or processor chips of a vehicle's electronics boards, leading to ...Read more

fortune.com
fortune.com
SpaceX, ULA, Blue Origin win $13 billion in Pentagon ...


Apr 5, 2025 — The US Space Systems Command said in a press release that SpaceX won contracts worth an anticipated $5.9 billion; United Launch Alliance was ...

spacedaily.com
spacedaily.com
Muon Space ramps up multi-mission satellite constellations


Jan 14, 2026 — In 2025 the company was awarded a 44.6 million dollar US Space Force SBIR Phase III Other Transaction Agreement to demonstrate a dual-use ...Read more

Loft Federal wins NASA task order for fault tolerant RISC V ...


Sep 3, 2025 — The new task order enables a hosted-orbital flight test of a next-generation fault-tolerant RISC-V computer with coprocessor support. Developed ...Read more

iafastro.org
iafastro.org
FINAL PROGRAMME


Sep 29, 2025 — ... U.S. Space Force, the European Space Agency, the ... • OBP, an on-board processor for SAR and optical payload data specialized for automatic ...Read more

forum.nasaspaceflight.com
forum.nasaspaceflight.com
USSF NSSL Phase 3 Launch Service Procurement


Apr 6, 2025 — – Space Systems Command (SSC) assigned nine FY25 National Security Space Launch (NSSL) launch service missions under the Phase 3 Lane 2 ...

DARPA Blackjack Program


Sep 4, 2018 — Blue Canyon Technologies awarded $1,541,649 on 2018-10-12 [Space News] Blue Canyon Technologies wins constellation contract. Telesat DARPA ...

SpaceX F9 : Transporter-8 : Vandenberg : 12 June 2023 (21:35 ...


We are thrilled to announce our upcoming mission on @SpaceX's Transporter-8. Four NewSat Mark-V satellites are loaded up and ready for orbit, stay tuned for ...

satnow.com
satnow.com
True Anomaly Secures $30M Space Systems Command ...


Apr 12, 2024 — True Anomaly announced it has been selected for a $30M U.S. Space Force Space Systems Command contract for the VICTUS HAZE Tactically ...

terranorbital.com
terranorbital.com
SSC awards contract to PredaSAR, a ...


The contract will support an on-orbit cooperative demonstration between the PredaSAR satellite constellation and the joint SSC, AFRL, and Defense Advanced ...Read more

Space Force Selects Terran Orbital for STEP 2.0 Contracts


Terran Orbital selected by US Space Force for $237 million STEP 2.0 contract to support next-generation space technology development.Read more

Terran Orbital Awarded Contract in Support of the Space ...


Terran Orbital to build 42 Satellites for Space Development Agency's Tranche 1 Transport Layer which will support global warfighter missions.

tyvak.eu
tyvak.eu
Interoperability demo planned between DARPA's Blackjack ...


FOR THE DEMONSTRATION, PREDASAR WILL INSTALL AN OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS TERMINAL MADE BY SA PHOTONICS ON ONE OF ITS SATELLITES.Read more

Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, York Space selected ...


The agency awarded three contracts: $700 million to Lockheed Martin, $692 million to Northrop Grumman and $382 million to York Space for the Transport Layer ...Read more

blogs.microsoft.com
blogs.microsoft.com
Analyzing data from space – the ultimate intelligent edge ...


Sep 17, 2019 — DIU chooses Microsoft and Ball Aerospace for space analytics. To help with these challenges, the Defense Innovation Unit (DIU) just selected ...

saemobilus.sae.org
saemobilus.sae.org
How the US Space Force is Leveraging Commercial ...


Dec 1, 2025 — The U.S. Space Force (USSF) Space Systems Command (SSC) achieved a ... JAM which leveraged the newly integrated TREx system.

How the US Space Force is Leveraging Commercial Antennas ...


... U.S. Naval Research Laboratory's (NRL) Transmit/Receive Enterprise (TREx) Service from a research and development project into an SSC operational prototype.

militaryembedded.com
militaryembedded.com
Cloud processing capabilities by Microsoft and Ball Aerospace to ...


The prototype effort, facilitated by the Defense Innovation Unit, will evaluate Ball Aerospace's use of Azure as the cloud platform for CASINO to leverage ...

Space Systems Command names 12 firms to spacecraft- ...


The 12 vendors selected for this award are Axient LLC; Blue Canyon Technologies, LLC; General Atomics; Lockheed Martin Corp.; Loft Orbital Federal LLC; Lynk ...Read more

DARPA awards Pit Boss contract to SEAKR for satellite ...


SEAKR's Pit Boss solution will support the BlackJack program's mission as a next generation on-board processor leveraging off-the-shelf electronics adapted ...Read more

Integrated ground system for Space Development Agency ...


The contract will focus on designing, analyzing, and engineering an integrated ground system for the SDA's Proliferated Warfighter Space Architecture (PWSA).Read more

investors.parsons.com
investors.parsons.com
Parsons Awarded $30M Contract to Enhance Support to ...


“This expansion allows us to leverage our expertise in spacecraft control to enhance mission planning and execution through our as-a-service ...Read more

nextgov.com
nextgov.com
Ball Aerospace, Loft Federal and Microsoft to Team on ...


Apr 11, 2023 — Microsoft will provide its Azure Orbital Ground Station and its Azure Government cloud—which offers secret and top secret level accreditation ...Read more

Space Force Has a Major Satellite Oversight Problem, GAO ...


Apr 11, 2023 — “The utilization rate for the SCN has averaged 75% over the last decade. This rate exceeds the 70% level that Space Force officials cite as the ...Read more

ng.investing.com
ng.investing.com
Parsons wins $30 million contract for Blackjack space ...


Dec 22, 2025 — The expanded funding will allow Parsons to leverage its expertise in spacecraft control to enhance mission planning and execution through its ...Read more

finance.yahoo.com
finance.yahoo.com
Loft Orbital Federal, LLC Awarded NASA Task Order to ...


Sep 2, 2025 — Loft Orbital Federal, LLC Awarded NASA Task Order to Support Fault Tolerant RISC-V Flight Computer Mission. Business Wire. September 2, 2025 2 ...Read more

Parsons Awarded $55 Million Contract To Prepare and ...


Apr 28, 2023 — Parsons Awarded $55 Million Contract To Prepare and Integrate Space System Command's Medium Earth Orbit Missile Warning and Tracking ...

Kratos Awarded Multi-Million Dollar Ground System ...


Feb 17, 2026 — Kratos Awarded Multi-Million Dollar Ground System Contract by Airbus to Support OmanSat-1. Kratos Defense & Security Solutions, Inc. February 17 ...Read more

docs.aws.amazon.com
docs.aws.amazon.com
AWS Ground Station Locations


Finding the AWS region for a ground station location ; Punta Arenas 1, Punta Arenas, Chile, South America (São Paulo) ; Seoul 1, Seoul, South Korea, Asia Pacific ...Read more

AWS Ground Station Ubicaciones


Búsqueda de la AWS región para la ubicación de una estación terrestre ; Punta Arenas 1, Punta Arenas, Chile, América del Sur (São Paulo), sa-east-1 ; Seúl 1 ...Read more

AWS Ground Station - User Guide


Oct 22, 2025 — Punta Arenas 1. Punta Arenas,. Chile. South America. (São Paulo) ... the AWS Ground Station antenna locations, and your Amazon EC2 instances.Read more

esa.int
esa.int
ESA - Santiago station


The Santiago station terminals (AGO-7m,-9m,-11m,-12m) provide tracking capabilities in S-band (transmit & receive) and L- and X-band (receive); the station ...Read more

Estrack: ESA's global ground station network


ESA's tracking station network – Estrack – is a global system of ground stations providing links between satellites in orbit and ESOC, the European Space ...Read more

Ground station in Chile ready to connect to space via laser


Mar 10, 2026 — The optical ground station's laser links can transfer data at rates of up to 10 gigabits per second, enough to stream dozens of ultra-high- ...Read more

adastrarocket.com
adastrarocket.com
LeoLabs Inc. declares Costa Rica Space Radar operational


Apr 22, 2021 — On April 22nd 2021 LeoLabs inaugurated its Costa Rica Space Radar, with the help of partners such as Ad Astra Rocket Company, El Viejo, ...Read more

features.csis.org
features.csis.org
Eyes on the Skies: China's Growing Space ... - CSIS


Oct 4, 2022 — China uses a network of ground stations in South America to further its ambitions in space. While these stations support scientific missions ...

leolabs-space.medium.com
leolabs-space.medium.com
Introducing Costa Rica Space Radar | by LeoLabs - Medium


On April 22, 2021, LeoLabs hosted an inaugural ceremony at the radar site, with special guest attendees including Costa Rican President ...Read more

telespazio.com
telespazio.com
Latin America


Telespazio has a widespread presence throughout the continent, counting with offices in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica and Peru.Read more

Fucino Space Centre


The Fucino Space Centre carries out in-orbit satellite control, space mission management and telecommunications, television and multimedia services.Read more

Telespazio inaugurates a new Teleport in Maricá and ...


Mar 1, 2023 — Telespazio Teleport in Maricá is one of the most advanced satellite teleports in Latin America. Maricá can host several satellites earth stations, LEO and GEO ...Read more

Ground Systems


Telespazio offers end-to-end customized solutions for both large and complex satellite systems and smaller constellations.Read more

Space Centres & Teleports


The company relies on a domestic and international network of Space Centers and Teleports, the most important being the Fucino Space Centre in the Abruzzo ...Read more

Italian Space Agency and Telespazio join forces to ...


Feb 3, 2026 — The Italian Space Agency (ASI) and Telespazio, a Leonardo Group company, have signed an agreement to launch the RESPONSE programme, aimed at ...Read more

Telespazio en América Latina


Telespazio tiene una amplia presencia en todo el continente, contando con oficinas en Argentina, Brasil, Chile, Costa Rica, Colombia e Perú, ...Read more

Telespazio Argentina: new premises for offices and ...


In addition, the company will soon transfer its satellite teleport, consisting of two 6.3 metre Master antennas and the related transmission and reception ...Read more

Telespazio Argentina secures contract in Costa Rica


Under the contract Telespazio Argentina will provide cadastral services across 50% of Costa Rica. Survey work will be performed on a million parcels (sections ...

Contact us


Headquarters Via Tiburtina 965 00156 Rome, Italy Phone: +39 06.40791 Share Select a topic to contact the desired Telespazio area.

Teleport services


Telespazio can provide teleport services in support of many applications in the satellite domain, from Flight Operations to Satellite Communications and ...Read more

Telespazio will build a new satellite gateway for OneWeb ...


Feb 14, 2022 — “In the Maricá teleport today, we started work aimed at hosting the gateways that will be operative all over Latin America by the end of the ...Read more

Telespazio


Telespazio works to bring Space closer to Earth for the benefit of institutions, enterprises and communities by providing innovative space services.Read more

Telespazio will build a new satellite gateway for OneWeb ...


Telespazio will build a new satellite gateway for OneWeb at the teleport in Maricá, Brazil. 14 February 2022. Share. Telespazio Brasil will supply OneWeb, the ...Read more

Maritime


Benavidez Teleport. Installed at the ARSAT (Empresa Argentina de Soluciones Satelitales) facilities in Benevidez, Argentina, the Teleport offers satellite ...Read more

Press releases


2020 - 12:30. Space. Leonardo: Telespazio Argentina secures contract in Costa Rica. Press Releases ... Leonardo: Telespazio Brasil to build new satellite teleport ...Read more

Leonardo: Telespazio Argentina secures contract in Costa Rica


Total lines: 286

space.leonardo.com
space.leonardo.com
Telespazio satellite services - Space - Leonardo


Telespazio provides services for satellite launching and in-orbit control, and for the acquisition, processing and dissemination of satellite data.Read more

RID talks about the Fucino Space Centre - Leonardo


The Fucino Space Centre is the focal point of Telespazio's satellite services. RID editor Pietro Batacchi enters one of the world's largest civil teleports ...

aiad.it
aiad.it
TELESPAZIO 2025 - AIAD


Telespazio experts are active 24/7 to control all phases of the satellite life span from LEOP (Launch and Early Orbit Phase) through station keeping in the ...Read more

bnamericas.com
bnamericas.com
Telespazio to build a new satellite gateway for OneWeb ...


Feb 14, 2022 — OneWeb's constellation of 648 satellites will supply high-speed internet and low-latency, high-security communications for government ...

Argentina's Arsat mulls installing a teleport in ...


Jan 20, 2022 — A ground station linked to the SG-1 satellite currently under construction could be installed in Chile, Paraguay, or Bolivia.

esoc.esa.int
esoc.esa.int
Our Ground Stations | OPS Portal - ESOC


ESA's tracking station network – Estrack – is a global system of ground stations providing links between satellites in orbit and ESOC, the European Space ...Read more

adsabs.harvard.edu
adsabs.harvard.edu
Ground Stations Operation in Latin America


by KD Reiniger · 1997 — Central Receiving station in Latin America is the Brazilian ground station located at Cuiaba, MT. The station is operational since 1973 and followed the ERS ...Read more

intelsat.com
intelsat.com
Intelsat Adds European Capacity with Telespazio's Fucino ...


Sep 14, 2023 — Telespazio, a joint venture between Leonardo (80%) and Thales (33%), is one of the world's biggest suppliers of satellite solutions and services ...Read more

youtube.com
youtube.com
Tracking satellites at the speed of light


ESTRA is ISA's global network of ground stations. Each one keeps us connected to spacecraft from liftoff through low Earth orbit and far into deep space.

Telespazio


Telespazio works to bring Space closer to Earth, benefitting citizens, institutions and companies in a variety of sectors ranging from design and ...Read more

Satellite Operators Are Using Azure Orbital Ground Station for ...


Azure orbital ground station enables partner powerered space- to Cloud Transmissions providing easy and secure access to communication products.

Loft Integration & Test Center Walkthrough


Loft's 13000 square foot Integration & Test Center is built to support satellite production at scale. Our facility is comprised of dedicated ...

Sistema de consultas gratuitas de Propiedad Intelectual


Sistema de consulta gratuitas de Propiedad Intelectual. ... Go to channel REGISTRO NACIONAL COSTA RICA &middot; Sistema de presentación ...

Guia para solicitar el Certificado Inmobiliario Digital


Guia del Registro Nacional de Costa Rica para solicitar el Certificado Inmobiliario Digital en www.rnpdigital.com.

italianspaceindustry.it
italianspaceindustry.it
Telespazio Spa - Italian Space Industry Online Catalogue


Telespazio is a joint venture between Leonardo (67%) and Thales (33%) and one of the world's biggest suppliers of satellite solutions and services.Read more

developingtelecoms.com
developingtelecoms.com
New ground station to extend Globalstar's services ...


Jun 12, 2020 — The new station will allow uninterrupted coverage in the territories of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay, and Uruguay, says Globalstar, which ...Read more

Servicio Satelital and neXat sign satellite services deal in ...


Mar 14, 2023 — Argentina-based connectivity provider Servicio Satelital has partnered with neXat to provide its customers with advanced, satellite specific ...

totaltele.com
totaltele.com
Intelsat reaches teleport network deal with Italy's Telespazio


Telespazio, a global player in satellite solutions and services, is a joint venture between Leonardo and Thales, each owning 67% and 33% respectively. The ...Read more

waze.com
waze.com
Telespazio Argentina SA


Edificio Oslavia, segunda planta, WWH5+6PC, San José, Bolivar, Costa Rica. Abrir en Waze. 4034 9085. Ahora cerrado. Lunes07:30 - 18:00. Martes07:30 - 18:00.

leonardo.com
leonardo.com
Telespazio Brasil to build new satellite teleport in Maricá ...


Feb 12, 2020 — Leonardo: Telespazio Brasil to build new satellite teleport in Maricá, State of Rio de Janeiro, boosting its next-gen satellite services ...Read more

Argentina


Buenos Aires. We have an advanced network of commercial, administrative and engineering infrastructures in addition to an exceptional satellite ...Read more

contrato en Costa Rica para Telespazio Argentina


Leonardo: contrato en Costa Rica para Telespazio Argentina. • Telespazio Argentina completará el catastro urbano y rural de todo el territorio de. Costa Rica.

Telespazio Brasil to build new satellite teleport in Maricá, ...


Feb 12, 2020 — Leonardo: Telespazio Brasil to build new satellite teleport in Maricá, State of Rio de Janeiro, boosting its next-gen satellite services ...Read more

Leonardo: Telespazio Argentina secures contract in Costa ...


Mar 19, 2020 — Telespazio Argentina will provide cadastral services across 50% of Costa Rica. Survey work will be performed on a million parcels (sections of land) starting ...Read more

Telespazio Brasil to build new satellite teleport in Maricá ...


Feb 12, 2020 — Leonardo: Telespazio Brasil to build new satellite teleport in Maricá ... Press release (PDF, 463 KB) · Comunicado de imprensa (PDF, 465 KB).Read more

en.clickpetroleoegas.com.br
en.clickpetroleoegas.com.br
Telespazio inaugurates Satellite Teleport in Maricá to host ...


Mar 7, 2023 — Inauguration of the Maricá Teleport. YouTube video. Vídeo do YouTube. Via City Hall of Marica.Read more

devex.com
devex.com
Telespazio Argentina


Based in Buenos Aires , it operates in Chile, Costa Rica, Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay.Read more

elconservadorcr.com
elconservadorcr.com
TELESPAZIO IMPLICADA EN CORRUPCIÓN DE ALTO ...


Telespazio Argentina subsidiaria de Leonardo ha enfrentado distintos problemas por dar coimas a funcionarios públicos.

telecompaper.com
telecompaper.com
Telespazio Brasil opens new teleport for OneWeb satellites


Mar 2, 2023 — With a surface of 150,000 square metres, the Marica teleport can host several satellite earth stations, supporting LEO and GEO satellite ...Read more

rartel.ro
rartel.ro
Teleport Services


Telespazio network of owned teleport is located in: Europe (of which Fucino ... Argentina). The most requested range of services are: co-location of ...Read more

scirp.org
scirp.org
US Space Command (2020). US, Peru Expand Space Data ...


Jul 4, 2025 — Finally, this paper offers a timely exploration of LAC's strategic opportunities, from innovation to collaboration, with the potential to shape ...Read more

commons.wikimedia.org
commons.wikimedia.org
File:USSPACECOM, Peruvian National Commission on ...


File:USSPACECOM, Peruvian National Commission on Aerospace Research and Development, and Peruvian Air Force Sign Space Situational Awareness Sharing Agreement ( ...Read more

2017-2021.state.gov
2017-2021.state.gov
U.S.-Brazil Technology Safeguards Agreement


Mar 19, 2019 — The Agreement will establish the technical safeguards to support US space launches from Brazil while ensuring the proper handling of sensitive US technology.

safety.af.mil
safety.af.mil
US, Peru expand space data sharing partnership


US, Peru expand space data sharing partnership. Maj. Gen. Javier Tuesta Marquez, National Commission on Aerospace Research and Development (CONIDA), Republic ...Read more

armscontrollaw.com
armscontrollaw.com
The Safeguards Implementation Report for 2019


The Agency developed a State-level safeguards approach for one State and started the implementation of integrated safeguards in that State.

nationaldefensemagazine.org
nationaldefensemagazine.org
Space Development Agency Awards First Contracts


Aug 31, 2020 — Lockheed Martin was given a firm-fixed-price contract worth $187 million — and York Space Systems a $94 million firm-fixed-price contract — to ...Read more

fedscoop.com
fedscoop.com
Space Development Agency awards $324M contract for ' ...


May 27, 2022 — The Pentagon's Space Development Agency on Thursday awarded General Dynamics Mission Systems a $324.5 million contract to establish and sustain the ground ...

govtribe.com
govtribe.com
Other Transaction Agreement FA24012490004


This $170,326,320.00 Other Transaction Agreement was awarded by the U.S. Air Force on August 15, 2024 to York Space Systems LLC, a for-profit manufacturer of ...Read more

Transmit/Receive Enterprise (TREx) Service


Jun 11, 2024 — The TREx Service will support the Spacecraft Engineering Division, Code 8200 at NCST in developing spacecraft and ground systems for DoD, NASA, and other ...Read more

SDA Tranche 1 Operations & Integration (O&I)


May 27, 2022 — The Space Development Agency awarded General Dynamics Mission Systems, Inc. a contract valued at $324516613 on May 26, 2022 for operations ...

investor.caci.com
investor.caci.com
CACI Announces Successful Demonstration of Optical ...


May 17, 2022 — This successful test, completed using CACI's CrossBeam free-space optical terminals, is the first step in establishing more secure, space-based ...Read more

CACI | News


CACI Announces Successful Demonstration of Optical Intersatellite Links in Low Earth Orbit ... CACI Enters Agreement to Acquire SA Photonics, Inc. 11/3/2021.Read more

changeflow.com
changeflow.com
DOD Missile Tracking System Faces Cost and Technical Chal...


Feb 26, 2026 — A GAO report highlights significant cost and technical challenges facing the Department of Defense's new missile tracking system.Read more

tecknexus.com
tecknexus.com
Satellite & Non Terrestrial Networks (NTN)


On Tuesday, March 17, 2026, the U.S. Space Force's Space Systems Command (SSC) awarded a $446.8 million Ground Management and Integration (GMI) agreement to ...Read more

dau.edu
dau.edu
GAO Report on New Satellite Readiness and Scheduling ...


Jan 29, 2026 — According to GAO auditors, “…DOD is developing a new system—a large constellation of satellites—to detect and track missile threats. But its ...Read more

d18rn0p25nwr6d.cloudfront.net
d18rn0p25nwr6d.cloudfront.net
VOYAGER TECHNOLOGIES, INC. - Cloudfront.net


Mar 10, 2026 — There were 53,329,062 shares of registrant's Class A common stock and 5,758,566 shares of Class B common stock outstanding as of March 6, 2026.Read more

federalnewsnetwork.com
federalnewsnetwork.com
Is SDA getting ahead of itself on missile-warning satellites?


Mar 4, 2026 — Summary: GAO says the Space Development Agency is at risk of falling behind on missile-warning capability because of technology readiness gaps ...Read more

shephardmedia.com
shephardmedia.com
Kratos wins $579 million space defence contract for ground ...


Nov 27, 2023 — Kratos Defense and Security Solutions to provide satellite control capabilities to US Space Force and US Space Command.

aviationweek.com
aviationweek.com
Kratos Awarded $447 Million For Missile Warning Ground ...


2 days ago — The U.S. Space Force has awarded a follow-on contract to Kratos to provide ground management and integration services for its forthcoming ...

rbcsignals.com
rbcsignals.com
Global Ground Station Network |


Our global ground station network is designed to provide the satellite operator with multiple downlink points throughout their orbit.Read more

Ground Station as a Service |


RBC Signals offers ground station as a service (GSaaS) to satellite operators who are looking for a flexible, scalable option to serve as either their primary ...

RBC Signals


The RBC Signals Global Ground Station Network aggregates the unused capacity of existing satellite ground stations around the world. We provide a clean and ...

satsearch.co
satsearch.co
Global ground station network


The RBC Signals Global Ground Station Network aggregates the unused capacity of existing satellite ground stations around the world.Read more

Federated Global Ground Network


ATLAS excels at integrating any ground system regardless of the site owner or hardware. ATLAS is fully integrated with AWS ground and Viasat RTE.Read more

Azure Orbital Ground Station


Oct 25, 2024 — The Microsoft Azure Orbital Ground Station is designed to provide a low-latency connection between Azure and satellites, enabling operators ...

satellitegroundstation.com
satellitegroundstation.com
Site Owners - Satellite Ground Station


A Satellite Ground Station is a critical terrestrial facility designed for communication with satellites in orbit. Also known as earth stations.Read more

Punta Arenas Satellite Station


This station is strategically located to support satellite missions that require coverage in the far southern latitudes.

convergencialatina.com
convergencialatina.com
RBC Signals announces expansion of its ground station ...


Mar 13, 2025 — RBC Signals announces expansion of its ground station network with a dozen new antennas. · MORE ANALYSIS · A DIARIO LATINO 25-02-2026.Read more

Telespazio builds the largest teleport in Latin America in ...


Feb 16, 2022 — Telespazio builds the largest teleport in Latin America in Maricá. Debe ingresar para continuar leyendo. Usuario. Contraseña.Read more

mitsui.com
mitsui.com
Mitsui to Invest in ATLAS Space Operations, Inc., U.S.- ...


May 18, 2022 — Through the investment in ATLAS, Mitsui will expand its services for satellite operators, and will build an infrastructure that enables full ...Read more

researchgate.net
researchgate.net
(PDF) Market perspectives of Ground Segment as a Service


Oct 12, 2020 — ... Punta. Arenas or Dongara in the South Pole), which provides. rather ... antennas to RBC Signals network of ground stations [6]. This is ...

International Bible Students and Jehovah's Witnesses in ...


Apr 11, 2020 — To the Jehovah's Witness, there seems an obvious continuity between the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, founded by Charles Taze Russell, ...Read more

Location of automatic weather stations (AWS) at the Gran ...


Location of automatic weather stations (AWS) at the Gran Campo Nevado Ice Cap and the weather station (WS) at Punta Arenas. Glacier outlines are based on ...Read more

pt.linkedin.com
pt.linkedin.com
ATLAS Space Operations, Inc.


ATLAS Space Operations is the leading provider of Ground Software as a Service™ in the space communications industry.Read more

usaspending.gov
usaspending.gov
CONTRACT to SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGIES ...


View a summary page of this 2019 CONTRACT to SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGIES CORP. from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to PALANTIR USG INC


View a summary page of this 2023 CONTRACT to PALANTIR USG INC from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to THE AEROSPACE CORPORATION


View a summary page of this 2018 CONTRACT to THE AEROSPACE CORPORATION from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to RANGE GENERATION NEXT LLC


View a summary page of this 2014 CONTRACT to RANGE GENERATION NEXT LLC from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to BOOZ ALLEN HAMILTON INC


View a summary page of this 2021 CONTRACT to BOOZ ALLEN HAMILTON INC from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to AMENTUM TECHNOLOGY, INC.


View a summary page of this 2020 CONTRACT to AMENTUM TECHNOLOGY, INC. from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY ...


View a summary page of this 2022 CONTRACT to THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY APPLIED PHYSICS LABORATORY LLC from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to NORTHROP GRUMMAN SYSTEMS ...


View a summary page of this 2018 CONTRACT to NORTHROP GRUMMAN SYSTEMS CORPORATION from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to COLSA CORP


View a summary page of this 2020 CONTRACT to COLSA CORP from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to RAYTHEON COMPANY


View a summary page of this 2023 CONTRACT to RAYTHEON COMPANY from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to ASTRONICS ADVANCED ELECTRONIC ...


View a summary page of this 2024 CONTRACT to ASTRONICS ADVANCED ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS CORP. from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to PARSONS GOVERNMENT SERVICES INC.


View a summary page of this 2025 CONTRACT to PARSONS GOVERNMENT SERVICES INC. from the Department of Homeland Security.

CONTRACT to KRATOS UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS, ...


View a summary page of this 2018 CONTRACT to KRATOS UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS, INC from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to KRATOS UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS, ...


View a summary page of this 2023 CONTRACT to KRATOS UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS, INC from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to GENERAL DYNAMICS MISSION SYSTEMS ...


View a summary page of this 2024 CONTRACT to GENERAL DYNAMICS MISSION SYSTEMS, INC. from the Department of Defense.

KRATOS ANTENNA SOLUTIONS CORPORATION


View the federal spending activity for KRATOS ANTENNA SOLUTIONS CORPORATION in this profile page.

KRATOS DEFENSE & ROCKET SUPPORT SERVICES, INC.


View the federal spending activity for KRATOS DEFENSE & ROCKET SUPPORT SERVICES, INC. in this profile page.

CONTRACT to KRATOS UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS, ...


View a summary page of this 2024 CONTRACT to KRATOS UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS, INC from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to KRATOS ANTENNA SOLUTIONS ...


View a summary page of this 2024 CONTRACT to KRATOS ANTENNA SOLUTIONS CORPORATION from the Department of Defense.

CONTRACT to GENERAL DYNAMICS MISSION SYSTEMS ...


View a summary page of this 2024 CONTRACT to GENERAL DYNAMICS MISSION SYSTEMS, INC. from the Department of Defense.

wol.jw.org
wol.jw.org
“Ham” Radio—A Hobby That Can Help Others


... station and operator be licensed. The radio frequency bands that they can ... Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania; Terms of Use · Privacy ...Read more

watchtowerdocuments.org
watchtowerdocuments.org
History of WBBR


In 1941, WBBR's license was transferred to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, the religion's publishing arm, from the Peoples Pulpit ...Read more

mod.go.jp
mod.go.jp
National Security Space


Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2013. 9 Mountjoy, Shane. (2009) ... Space Force. The Washington Post, www.washingtonpost.com. Page 5. 海幹校 ...Read more

cambridge.org
cambridge.org
Jehovah's Witnesses


Dec 18, 2024 — Regarded as the theological basis for the modern form of fundamentalist Christianity. 4 By then renamed Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society.Read more

travis.af.mil
travis.af.mil
821st CRG stays … - Travis Air Force Base


Feb 9, 2018 — space force. For months now, you have been working overtime to en ... Sunday at Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day. Saints Fairfield ...Read more

piotrandryszczak.pl
piotrandryszczak.pl
Chapter 7. The organization and its practices


It is not the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society and all its branches, a legal agency incorporated according to the laws of a worldly political state. (“New ...Read more

usafa.edu
usafa.edu
Class of 2028 Appointee Handbook


Mar 1, 2024 — You can also volunteer for the elective space course to learn about current U.S. Air Force and U.S. Space Force mission areas with hands-on ...Read more

pdcnet.org
pdcnet.org
Jehovah's Witnesses in Britain


Oct 23, 2025 — Reprinted as a booklet by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, Allegheny PA. Watch Tower. 1916. “I. B. S. A. Conscripts in Great Britain ...Read more

executivegov.com
executivegov.com
TREx Moves to Operational Prototype During JAM ...


Dec 1, 2025 — Following a JAM demonstration, TREx advanced from a research effort into an operational prototype.

GAO Urges Transparency, Realism in SDA Missile Defense


Jan 29, 2026 — GAO warns that the Space Development Agency's satellite-based missile warning program faces technology, schedule and cost risks.

hstoday.us
hstoday.us
Space Force Needs Long-Term Plan for Satellite Network


Apr 11, 2023 — The utilization rate for the SCN has averaged 75 percent over the last decade. This rate exceeds the 70 percent level that Space Force officials ...Read more

instagram.com
instagram.com
🚀 NRL Delivers Next-Generation Space Operations ...


NRL's Spacecraft Engineering Department has developed the Transmit/Receive Enterprise (TREx) service to provide advanced software development ...

learn.microsoft.com
learn.microsoft.com
Estaciones terrestres como servicio de Azure Orbital


En esta sesión, presentamos Azure Orbital, que es una nueva estación terrestre totalmente administrada como servicio (GSaaS) que permite a ...

af.mil
af.mil
Space Force awards National Security Space Launch ...


Aug 7, 2020 — The Phase 2 Procurement contracts are for launch service orders starting in fiscal year 2020 through 2024, with the first missions launching in ...Read more

The Republic of Korea and United States kick off Ulchi ...


Aug 22, 2025 — U.S. Space Force Guardians will also integrate space-based ... THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS (LDS). - Sundays ...Read more

techport.nasa.gov
techport.nasa.gov
Fault Tolerant RISC-V Flight Computer with Coprocessor ...


Jan 22, 2026 — In this project, we seek to study the feasibility to automating SIFT for a RISC-V computer system implemented on the RadPC fault-tolerant, FPGA- ...Read more

dafhistory.af.mil
dafhistory.af.mil
Space Systems Command (USSF)


Redesignated as Space Systems Command on 13 Aug 2021. Assignments. Air Force Systems Command, 20 Mar 1961; Air Force Materiel Command, 1 Jul 1992; Air Force ...Read more

nationalguard.mil
nationalguard.mil
New York Guard Airmen Discuss Space Operations With ...


May 9, 2022 — The Brazilians are seeking to develop their own military space operations program and join the system of space domain awareness the United ...Read more

ang.af.mil
ang.af.mil
CRUZEX 2024: Strengthening partnerships across the Americas


Nov 21, 2024 — The largest Brazilian-led multinational air combat exercise in Latin America, held at Natal Air Force Base in Brazil, Nov. 3-15.Read more

wikipedia.org
wikipedia.org
Swedish Space Corporation


SSC has its own ground stations in Sweden, the U.S., Canada, Chile, Thailand and Australia. The company also has partnering ground stations in the U.S. ...Read more

List of Amazon locations


Central America: Costa Rica · South America: Brazil. São Paulo. Chile. Santiago. Colombia: Bogotá (BOG15); Medellín (2023). Europe/Middle East ...Read more

microsoft.com
microsoft.com
RBC Signals Global Ground Station as a Service (GSaaS)


RBC Signals provides the most flexible global ground station network in terms of business terms, service level agreements, size of apertures, locations, and ...

Introducing Azure Orbital: Process satellite data at cloud- ...


Sep 22, 2020 — The new ground station service enables satellite operators to communicate to and control their satellites, process data, and scale operations ...Read more

amazon.com
amazon.com
Ubicaciones de zonas locales de AWS


Las zonas locales están disponibles en 35 áreas metropolitanas de todo el mundo: 18 fuera de los Estados Unidos (Auckland, Bangkok, Pekín, Buenos Aires, ...Read more

l3harris.com
l3harris.com
Space Development Agency's Proliferated Warfighter ...


Tranche 1 (T1) Tracking Layer: L3Harris is designing and building 16 missile ... Space Development Agency Awards L3Harris $843 Million Contract for Tracking Layer ...

Space Development Agency Awards L3Harris $843 Million ...


Dec 19, 2025 — L3Harris Technologies has received a contract from the Space Development Agency (SDA) to build 18 infrared satellites for the Tranche 3 (T3) ...

gdmissionsystems.com
gdmissionsystems.com
Satellite Ground Systems


General Dynamics Mission Systems Awarded $491.6 Million Design and Development Contract for Space Development Agency's Ground, Management and Integration ...

General Dynamics and Iridium Awarded Ground Control ...


May 26, 2022 — (NASDAQ: IRDM) announced today that they have been awarded a contract by the Space Development Agency in the amount of $324,516,613, including a ...Read more

spacepolicyonline.com
spacepolicyonline.com
USSF's Space Systems Command To Stand Up This Summer


Apr 8, 2021 — It is essentially a rebranding of the former Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center. No specific date was set for its establishment. That ...Read more

marcasur.com
marcasur.com
Fully operational status for Costa Rica Space Radar


"Only nine months after breaking ground in Costa Rica, it is gratifying to announce full operational status for the most advanced commercial space radar of its ...Read more

baxtel.com
baxtel.com
Amazon Data Center Locations (AWS)


Amazon AWS operates 506 data centers across 52 regions. Compare facilities, pricing, and specifications for colocation services.

defenseone.com
defenseone.com
Space Force to Absorb USAF Command to Run Launches ...


Apr 8, 2021 — The Space and Missile Systems Center will become Space Systems Command. Patrick Tucker. |. April 8, 2021. Space · Space Force · Air Force ...Read more

reseller.lat
reseller.lat
Chile: Nueva región de AWS en América del Sur


Nov 8, 2025 — Nueva región de AWS en América del Sur se inaugurará en 2026. Aproximará la infraestructura y los servicios de AWS a los clientes chilenos.

ymaws.com
ymaws.com
Teleports in Latin America


Today, TIBA has teleport facilities not only in Buenos Aires but also in Uruguay and. Brazil, and serves clients in Paraguay,. Chile, Ecuador, Colombia, Peru ...Read more

cision.com
cision.com
Ground Station in Santiago de Chile - SSC Space


Jan 15, 2025 — SSC Space (formerly known as Swedish Space Corporation) is a leading global provider of advanced space services, with more than 50 years of ...Read more

sagepub.com
sagepub.com
Brazil's First Steps in the Commercial Space Launch Sector


by TA Pedrosa · 2024 · Cited by 1 — This article aims to analyze the initiatives already taken for this purpose, such as the Technological Safeguards Agreement signed between ...

aviationtoday.com
aviationtoday.com
Ball Aerospace, Microsoft to Demonstrate Cloud Processing ...


Sep 29, 2019 — The prototype effort, facilitated by the Defense Innovation Unit, will evaluate Ball Aerospace's use of Azure as the cloud platform for CASINO.

cinde.org
cinde.org
Costa Rica Inaugurates the Most Advanced Space Radar ...


Apr 26, 2021 — LeoLabs, a US company, inaugurated in Costa Rica a radar capable of detecting space objects as small as a golf ball. It is one of the most advanced of its kind.Read more

Inauguran radar espacial en Costa Rica, el más ava...


Apr 26, 2021 — El radar, situado en Carrillo, provincia de Guanacaste (oeste), permite dar cobertura a toda la Órbita Baja de la Tierra (LEO, por sus siglas en ...Read more

squarespace.com
squarespace.com
The Transformation of Ground Stations:


Freedom creates a software-centric cloud based network that is fully automated. ▫ Provides an intuitive user interface, flexible.Read more

nbclosangeles.com
nbclosangeles.com
LA Air Force Base to Become Command Site for US Space ...


Apr 8, 2021 — The US Space Force announced Thursday that one of its three major commands will be headquartered at the Space and Missile Systems Center at the Los Angeles Air ...Read more

actualidadaeroespacial.com
actualidadaeroespacial.com
Telespazio consigue un contrato en Costa Rica


Mar 20, 2020 — Telespazio consigue un contrato en Costa Rica · El contrato tiene un valor de 20 millones de dólares y una duración de cuatro años. · El Registro ...

colem.co.uk
colem.co.uk
Space Situational Awareness | Colem


11. “USSPACECOM and Uruguayan Air Force Sign Space Situational Awareness Information Sharing Agreement,”. U.S. Space Command Media Release, April 9, 2024. https ...Read more

newspacetracker.com
newspacetracker.com
Atlas Space Operations - New Space Tracker


Astralintu Space Technologies is Latin America's first Ground Station as a Service provider, operating the Equatorial Gr... Astrolight Lithuania. Vilnius ...Read more

phys.org
phys.org
NASA to test solution for radiation-tolerant computing in ...


Jan 8, 2025 — Developed by researchers at Montana State University in Bozeman, RadPC aims to demonstrate computer recovery from faults caused by single event ...Read more

asi.it
asi.it
ITALIAN SPACE INDUSTRY


The service employs ground stations capable of operating in VHF, UHF,. S-band and X-band. All the ground stations can perform payload data downlink and TT&C ...Read more

microwavejournal.com
microwavejournal.com
Sierra Space Awarded $740M Prime Contract by Space ...


Jan 17, 2024 — The prime contract, valued at $740 million and awarded through an Other Transaction Authority, is for the design, production, delivery, operations and ...

channelchek.com
channelchek.com
Kratos Defense & Security (KTOS) - Awarded Another ...


1 day ago — The Space Force's Space Systems Command awarded Kratos a $447 million follow-on contract for Ground Management and Integration for the first two ...Read more

viasat.com
viasat.com
RBC Signals


RBC Signals specializes in Fractional and Dynamic Spectrum Leasing and Ground Stations as a Service (GSaaS), offering flexible, cost-effective, and reliable ...

climateandsecurity.org
climateandsecurity.org
GAO-13-283, High-Risk Series: An Update


Potential gaps in environmental satellite data beginning as early as 2014 and lasting as long as 53 months have led to concerns that future weather forecasts ...Read more

gtlaw-techventureviews.com
gtlaw-techventureviews.com
From Edge to Orbit: Commercial and Government Momentum ...


Mar 12, 2026 — Discover how AI's compute demands are driving innovation in space-based data centers. Learn about government funding, industry expertise, ...

spacequip.eu
spacequip.eu
Loft Federal and Microsoft Partner with Ball Aerospace ...


Apr 11, 2023 — The contract, worth up to $176m, was awarded to Ball Aerospace in October 2022 and involves building 10 satellites and accompanying ground ...Read more

dimdex.com
dimdex.com
Space Development Agency orders its first satellites


Sep 2, 2020 — While York Space Systems will receive $94 million to build its 10 satellites, Lockheed Martin will receive $188 million for the same number.Read more

ewtn.com
ewtn.com
Incredible Creed of the Jehovah's Witnesses


Before long, however, Russell had adopted the title, Zion's Watch Tower Tract Society. In 1896 this was changed to The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. In ...Read more

substack.com
substack.com
Headlines: The Integration, Iteration, and Interoperability ...


The increasing use of drone warfare in global conflicts presents a new imperative for military forces to quickly identify and intercept hostile ...Read more

aws-services.info
aws-services.info
AWS Ground Station - AWS Services and Regions


AWS service "AWS Ground Station" is currently available in following AWS Regions ; sa-east-1, South America (Sao Paulo), 2022-04-07 ; ap-northeast-2, Asia Pacific ...Read more

spaceflightnow.com
spaceflightnow.com
Space Development Agency, SpaceX to launch next-gen ...


Sep 10, 2025 — York Space Systems announced the completion of its first 21 T1TL satellites back in April 2025. They were initially awarded a $382 million ...Read more

Space Development Agency awards roughly $3.5 billion to ...


Dec 20, 2025 — L3Harris technology for the SDA Tranche 3 Tracking Layer ... The company received a $890 million contract for 18 Tranche 2 Tracking Layer ...Read more

spaceintelreport.com
spaceintelreport.com
Loft Federal to provide 10 Airbus OneWeb satellite ...


Apr 11, 2023 — Ten of the 15 satellites for Loft's most recent order from Airbus will be used for the US Space Development Agency (SDA) as part of a Ball Aerospace contract.Read more

Our 16 optical comms terminals on DARPA sats working ...


Aug 25, 2023 — CACI International Inc. said the 16 optical communications terminals launched on four US military satellites in June are “operating at or above [specifications ...Read more

9and10news.com
9and10news.com
ATLAS Space Operations finalizes satellite ground station ...


Mar 11, 2026 — This facility connects American Samoa to an existing network of ground stations located in Hawaii, Guam and Australia. The facility will serve ...Read more

aeb.gov.br
aeb.gov.br
telespazio brasil s/a - Catalog


... different countries. Telespazio has been present in Brazil since 1997 ... teleport facilities in Itaboraí and Maricá. www.telespazio.com. Location.Read more

crcdaily.com
crcdaily.com
Costa Rica now home to world-class space radar


Apr 26, 2021 — ... LeoLabs has announced that the facilities are “fully operational.” The radar, which LeoLabs says is the world's most advanced commercial ...Read more

globenewswire.com
globenewswire.com
SSC Space Deploys Kratos' OpenSpace® Platform in its New


Mar 2, 2026 — SSC Space Deploys Kratos' OpenSpace® Platform in its New Service for LEO Missions: SSC Space Go. OpenSpace's Orchestration Capabilities Enable ...Read more

Axient, an Astrion Legacy Company, Selected for $237


STEP 2.0, a 10-year, multi-award Indefinite Delivery/Indefinite Quantity (IDIQ) contract worth up to $237 million, aims to advance military space technology, ...

columbia.edu
columbia.edu
Download File - Academic Commons


by S Nakao Nakahodo · 2022 — After decades of negotiations, Brazil and the U.S. signed a technology safeguards agreement (TSA) in 2019, enabling, among other undertakings, the launch of ...

rand.org
rand.org
Improving Integration and Synchronization of Space ...


by BL TRIEZENBERG · 2023 · Cited by 7 — Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality.Read more

Order in Orbit


by A Agachi · 2025 — U.S. Space Command, “USSPACECOM and Uruguayan Air Force Sign Space Situational Awareness ... Information Sharing Agreement,” press release, April ...Read more

commerce.gov
commerce.gov
Office of Space Commerce - U.S. Department of Commerce


The agreement defines how the two departments will work cooperatively to implement the National Space Council's Space Policy Directive 3 (SPD-3). SPD-3 seeks to ...Read more

mohfw.gov.in
mohfw.gov.in
darpa blackjack satellites 2025 - Apps on Google Play


The DARPA Blackjack program aims for resilient, cost-effective military satellite constellations in Low Earth Orbit (LEO). It transforms national security.Read more

mlq.ai
mlq.ai
Space Development Agency Awards Roughly $3.5 Billion ...


Dec 20, 2025 — The U.S. Space Development Agency has awarded about $3.5 billion to four companies to build 72 Tracking Layer Tranche 3 satellites for ...

auria.space
auria.space
Auria Awarded USSF JAM Prototype in Support of U.S. and ...


Jun 6, 2025 — The JAM prototype was awarded through a Space Enterprise Consortium (SpEC) Other Transaction Authority (OTA) and seeks to establish a flexible ...

gd.com
gd.com
General Dynamics Mission Systems Awarded $491.6 ...


Sep 4, 2024 — It was awarded a $491.6 million contract by the Space Development Agency (SDA) to perform design, analysis, engineering studies, and technical augmentation.Read more

heritage.org
heritage.org
The US Space Force (USSF) was created


by J Venable · Cited by 2 — ... force/ (accessed June 13, 2021). 13. Satnews, “Space & Missile Systems Center to Be Re-Designated as the USAF's New Space Systems Command,” April 11, 2021,.

rnpdigital.com
rnpdigital.com
Gestiones y Consultas de Registro de Bienes Muebles


Por medio de esta cuenta de correo, se resolverán únicamente consultas sobre trámites de documentos presentados al Registro de Bienes Muebles, que tengan que ...Read more

Registro Inmobiliario


Consultas (planos, propiedades, gravámenes, documentos). Reconstrucción e índice. El Departamento de Reconstrucción es el encargado de Entregar y Recibir.Read more

Registro Nacional


Presentación de Documentos Digitales para Bienes Inmuebles, Bienes Muebles y Personas Jurídicas. ... Sistema de consultas, compra de certificaciones, solicitud de ...Read more

Consultas Registro Inmobiliario


Se podrán presentar las consultas de expedientes jurídicos; para cada solicitud deberá indicarse: Número de expediente y número de finca según corresponda y en ...Read more

Aranceles de Servicios


Nov 24, 2025 — ¢2800 Registro Nacional por las primeras 10 hojas. La hoja adicional tiene un costo de ¢500,00 cada una. Acuerdo Firme J342-2025 de la Sesión No ...

Sistema de Certificaciones e Informes Digitales del ...


Ingreso para Usuarios Registrados · Bienvenidos al Sistema de Certificaciones e Informes Digitales en línea del Registro Nacional · Notificaciones.

Sistema de Certificaciones e Informes Digitales ...


Digitar en el módulo de verificación el número de certificación. (este módulo se encuentra abajo del espacio de “usuario” y “clave” del sistema RNPDIGITAL-1- ...

Tarifas y Aranceles


Sitio Oficial del Registro Nacional de Costa Rica 2025. Enlace al sitio de gobierno. Ventanilla Digital Consultas y Certificaciones · Inicio; Institución.

Servicios Tarifa Registro Nacional Timbre Archivo ...


Jan 1, 2026 — 1/ En los servicios que aplique, la Tarifa Registro Nacional incluye el Timbre del Registro Nacional (¢300 o ¢100), conforme a lo establecido en ...

magazines.marinelink.com
magazines.marinelink.com
REPORTER


Sep 1, 1981 — The PrimaVac vertically mounted centrifugal system, together with any pump, provides positive suction that will lift most liquid products 30 ...Read more

siri.snitcr.go.cr
siri.snitcr.go.cr
Sistema de Información Registro Inmobiliario-VISOR


Registro Nacional de Costa Rica. Buscar capas de información por metadatos ... Distrito. Barrio. Capa bienes inmuebles. Consulta a realizar. Rango de ...Read more

seaways.net.au
seaways.net.au
International Tug & OSV January/February 2017


Mar 30, 2016 — The product portfolio includes cranes, lifesaving · equipment, winches and handling equipment. A worldwide service network including the supply ...Read more

registronacional.go.cr
registronacional.go.cr
Bienes Inmuebles Enlaces


rnpdigital@rnp.go.cr . Lunes a viernes de 8 am a 4 pm. Logo con el enlace a la página de inicio del RNP.Read more

via.tt.se
via.tt.se
Amazon to Invest More Than $4 Billion to Launch ... - Via TT


May 7, 2025 — In 2021, AWS launched an AWS Ground Station antenna location in Punta Arenas. AWS Ground Station is a fully managed service that allows ...Read more

link.springer.com
link.springer.com
Download book PDF - Springer


Until recently, noctilucent clouds were regarded merely as a curious atmos- pheric phenomenon, the occurrence of which aroused only limited scientific.Read more

Submarine Mass Movements and their Consequences


May 25, 2005 — This sixth volume of Submarine Mass Movements and Their Consequences presents an impressive collection of papers presented at the 7th ...Read more

yumpu.com
yumpu.com
Tug Boat Market Report - May 2013 - Marcon International, ...


Dec 19, 2014 — Tug Boat Market Report - May 2013 - Marcon International, Inc.

imprentanacional.go.cr
imprentanacional.go.cr
Imprenta Nacional de Costa Rica


Registro Nacional de la Propiedad. Horario de atención: Sucursal la Uruca: Lunes a viernes de. 8:00 a.m. a 3:30 p.m., jornada continua. Sucursal Curridabat ...

tutorialsdojo.com
tutorialsdojo.com
AWS Ground Station


AWS Ground Station provides globally distributed antenna locations operated and maintained by AWS. · Ground stations are used to communicate with satellites ...Read more

inec.cr
inec.cr
INEC


El Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos es una institución autónoma del gobierno de Costa Rica, encargada de la producción y divulgación estadística ...

redmondmag.com
redmondmag.com
Azure Orbital Ground Station Service Commercially ...


Sep 14, 2022 — Microsoft commercially released the Azure Orbital Ground Station service and previewed the Azure Orbital Cloud Access service.

vozdeguanacaste.com
vozdeguanacaste.com
Most advanced space radar on the planet set up in ...


Apr 22, 2021 — This radar, located in Filadelfia in the canton of Carrillo, allows full coverage of low Earth orbit, tracks objects, including active ...Read more

azucareraelviejo.com
azucareraelviejo.com
Space radar inaugurated in Costa Rica will track objects ...


Apr 22, 2021 — Space radar inaugurated in Costa Rica will track objects the size of a golf ball. The Leo Labs company inaugurated the most advanced radar on ...Read more

convergedigest.com
convergedigest.com
ATLAS Space opens nine new ground stations


Jul 31, 2019 — ATLAS Space Operations activated nine new ground stations in its network, bringing its total of ground stations to 13.Read more

delfino.cr
delfino.cr
Costa Rica inaugura moderno Radar Espacial con sede en ...


Apr 22, 2021 — La herramienta en Costa Rica será capaz de rastrear objetos, incluidos satélites activos y desechos orbitales de hasta 2 cm, y trabajará en ...Read more

spacewatchafrica.com
spacewatchafrica.com
RBC Signals Expands Global Ground Station Network with ...


Apr 4, 2025 — Strategically located across North and South America, Europe, Africa, and Asia, the antennas will bolster RBC Signals' already robust global ...Read more

mb.cision.com
mb.cision.com
SSC Space advances optical communications


Press Release. SSC Space advances optical communications. – New ground station ready in Santiago, Chile. Stockholm, Sweden – 10 March 2026. SSC Space ...Read more

spaceconnectonline.com.au
spaceconnectonline.com.au
SSC confirms new laser communications ground station ...


Mar 11, 2026 — The station will enable laser-based, free-space optical communications between satellites and ground infrastructure, delivering faster and more ...Read more

news.cision.com
news.cision.com
SSC Space - New ground station ready in Santiago, Chile


Mar 10, 2026 — SSC Space announces a new Optical Ground Station (OGS) ready for operations at its site in Santiago, Chile. This cutting-edge technology, ...Read more

guanacastealaaltura.com
guanacastealaaltura.com
Radar Espacial Costa Rica inicia operaciones


Apr 22, 2021 — Ubicado en el cantón Carrillo, Guanacaste, es el dispositivo comercial de monitoreo y mapeo de la órbita baja de la Tierra más avanzado del ...Read more

infoespacial.com
infoespacial.com
LeoLabs y Ad Astra Rocket instalan el radar espacial más ...


Apr 27, 2021 — LeoLabs y Ad Astra Rocket Company han instalado el radar espacial más potente del mundo en Costa Rica, capaz de detectar objetos de hasta ...Read more

gminsights.com
gminsights.com
Satellite Ground Station Market Size & Share Report, 2034


The global satellite ground station market was valued at USD 53.8 billion in 2024 and is estimated to grow at a CAGR of 12.8% from 2025 to 2034, ...

sutel.go.cr
sutel.go.cr
Sutel | SUTEL: Superintendencia de Telecomunicaciones


Consulte la calidad de los servicios fijos y móviles · Mapa Banda Ancha · Homologación · Registre su Línea Prepago · Mi Comparador.

Solicitud uso frecuencias


3 days ago — Presentar la correspondiente solicitud ante el Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación, Tecnología y Telecomunicaciones (MICITT), mediante el ...

operadores-satelitales-de-internet-en-costa-rica. ...


Nov 4, 2025 — El acceso a servicios de telecomunicaciones de calidad, en los últimos años, se ha convertido en un elemento esencial para el desarrollo ...

Resolución del Consejo


Mar 3, 2026 — San José - Costa Rica gestiondocumental@sutel.go.cr. Página 1 de 41. 02059-SUTEL-SCS-2026. Resolución del Consejo. El suscrito, Secretario del ...Read more

Consulta Pública borrador pliego condiciones Licitación ...


Jul 18, 2023 — ... Costa Rica y de la SUTEL de iniciar el proceso de asignación de espectro para redes de 5G en Costa Rica. Este proceso busca garantizar el ...Read more

micitt-robc-002-formulario-de-solicitud-de-permiso-de-uso- ...


FORMULARIO DE SOLICITUD DE PERMISO DE USO DEL ESPECTRO RADIOELÉCTRICO PARA EL SERVICIO DE RADIOAFICIONADO Y LA OPERACIÓN DE LA BANDA CIUDADANA. (N° MICITT ...Read more

San Jose, 7 de enero de 2021 00138-SUTEL-DGC- ...


Adicionalmente, en esta sección se analizan las respuestas obtenidas en la consulta pública Con por los actuales operadores móviles. Dichos operadores del ...Read more

Audiencias y Consultas Públicas


Consulta pública sobre interés, demanda y nuevos aplicativos en las bandas destinadas para el desarrollo de sistemas IMT en Costa Rica, El plazo de esta ...Read more

micitt-robc-003-formulario-de-solicitud-para-la- ...


FORMULARIO DE SOLICITUD PARA LA INSTALACIÓN DE ESTACIONES REPETIDORAS ... Banda de frecuencias donde operará la estación repetidora. de conformidad con ...Read more

Audiencias y Consultas Públicas


Audiencias y Consultas Públicas ; 12/12/2023, Modificación parcial de la resolución RCS-175-2023 “Lineamientos para la implementación de la Portabilidad Numérica ...Read more

San José, 27 de noviembre de 2023 10052-SUTEL-DGC- ...


Nov 27, 2023 — PROPUESTA DE ACTUALIZACIÓN DE REQUISITOS PARA ATENDER SOLICITUDES DE. PERMISO DE USO FRECUENCIAS DESTINADAS A SISTEMAS DE RADIOENLACES FIJOS.Read more

globalsat.com
globalsat.com
Globalsat Group will provide IoT and broadband ...


The new IoT service offers low installation and maintenance costs, minimal power consumption, and coverage in Argentina and the entire region through ARSAT's ...Read more

prensario.net
prensario.net
La conectividad satelital plantea optar por servicios con ...


Jul 28, 2025 — Para fines de 2025, Orbith proyecta lanzar su propio satélite geoestacionario y alcanzar las 50.000 conexiones activas. Telespazio Argentina, ...Read more

sig.sutel.go.cr
sig.sutel.go.cr
Spectrum Spatial - Sutel


Default map centre. Enter coordinates. © OpenStreetMap contributors, CC BY-SA Superintendencia de Telecomunicaciones (SUTEL). i. + −. 50 km. Done Cancel.

lexlatin.com
lexlatin.com
LeoLabs y Ad Astra Rocket instalan radar espacial en ...


May 19, 2021 — LeoLabs y Ad Astra Rocket instalan radar espacial en Costa Rica. Este es el cuarto radar ecuatorial de LeoLabs después de los instalados en ...

master.unibo.it
master.unibo.it
Telespazio, a joint venture between Leonardo (67%) and ...


Telespazio operates worldwide through numerous companies, and has a wide international network of space centres and teleports. In particular, it is present ...Read more

satcom.digital
satcom.digital
Inauguration Ceremony Marks Completion of New ...


Mar 2, 2023 — Marzio Laurenti, CEO of Telespazio Brasil, added: “The OneWeb gateway in our Teleport in Marica is another very important achievement of the ...Read more

sdxcentral.com
sdxcentral.com
OneWeb signs distribution deals with Veon and Sure


In Brazil, OneWeb this week inaugurated its new satellite network portal at Telespazio's teleport in Maricá, in the state of Rio de Janeiro. Construction began ...Read more

nasaspaceflight.com
nasaspaceflight.com
SpaceX Transporter-8 launches 72 payloads marking ...


Jun 12, 2023 — SpaceX launched the Transporter-8 rideshare mission on Monday, June 12, 2023 ... DARPA has its first four Blackjack Aces satellites on the flight.Read more

missiledefenseadvocacy.org
missiledefenseadvocacy.org
Space Force selects Parsons to develop ground system...


“Parsons will provide integrated ground and operations solutions for the MTC Epoch 1 program,” the Space Systems Command said May 16 in a news ...

msdynamicsworld.com
msdynamicsworld.com
Ball Aerospace and Loft leverage Azure in new federal ...


Apr 13, 2023 — The US Space Development Agency awarded a contract on October 10 for the experimental testbed NeXT as it prepares to launch a new satellite ...Read more

spacex.com
spacex.com
Transporter-8 Mission


On Monday, June 12 at 2:35 p.m. PT, Falcon 9 launched Transporter-8, SpaceX's eighth dedicated smallsat rideshare program mission, ...Read more

sofrep.com
sofrep.com
DARPA Blackjack: Proving Resilient Military Space at...


Feb 8, 2026 — DARPA's Blackjack program demonstrates how low-cost, proliferated satellites in low Earth orbit can deliver resilient military space ...

interestingengineering.com
interestingengineering.com
DARPA launches first, and now only, 'Blackjack' satellites


Jun 14, 2023 — Carried about a SpaceX Transporter-8 rideshare, DARPA's planned “Blackjack” satellite constellation delivers its first, and now only, four ...Read more

spacesafetymagazine.com
spacesafetymagazine.com
Press Clips Week 23-2023 –


Jun 20, 2023 — DARPA Downsizes Blackjack Space Experiment. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency on June 12 launched four satellites for a technology ...Read more

spaceref.com
spaceref.com
Space Systems Command successfully launches three ...


Jun 14, 2023 — Successfully launched three Department of Defense (DoD) Research and Development (R&D) satellites, built by Blue Canyon Technologies, for the US Space Force.Read more

micitt.go.cr
micitt.go.cr
MICITT–DCNT-DNPT-FORM-006-Formulario-para- ...


- De los requisitos para la obtención de un permiso de uso de bandas de frecuencias. Para la obtención de un permiso de uso de bandas de frecuencias a que ...Read more

Permisos y Concesiones de Telecomunicaciones


Asimismo, en cuanto al plazo de los permisos de uso de frecuencias, serán otorgados por tiempo limitado, según lo dispuesto en el citado artículo 26 de la Ley ...Read more

Canon de Reserva del Espectro Radioeléctrico 2026 ...


Jun 16, 2025 — Radioaficionado de Costa Rica, realización de exámenes para el otorgamiento de licencias en bandas aficionados y operadores de banda ...Read more

Preguntas Frecuentes | Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación, ...


Permisos de uso de frecuencias ... ¿Cómo puedo obtener un permiso de uso del espectro radioeléctrico en el servicio móvil marítimo y operaciones portuarias? R/ ...Read more

nacion.com
nacion.com
Costa Rica inaugura radar para resguardar satélites de ...


Apr 22, 2021 — El radar espacial fue instalado en una propiedad localizada a unos 600 metros de la Azucarera El Viejo, en el distrito de Filadelfia, ...Read more

pgrweb.go.cr
pgrweb.go.cr
Sistema Costarricense de Información Jurídica


MUNICIPALIDAD DE SAN JOSÉ. REGLAMENTO MUNICIPAL PARA LA CONSTRUCCIÓN,. INSTALACIÓN, CONSERVACIÓN, MANTENIMIENTO. Y EXPLOTACIÓN DE ESTACIONES TERRENAS.Read more

rn2.rnpdigital.com
rn2.rnpdigital.com
plataforma_servicios_aranceles


Jan 15, 2024 — Aranceles de Servicios ; Copias Expedientes Legales Y Administrativos. ¢100 Registro Nacional por cada hoja. Acuerdo J.406-2023, sesión 33-2023, ...

marketscreener.com
marketscreener.com
Parsons Awarded $30 Million Contract to Enhance Support to ...


Parsons Awarded $30 Million Contract to Enhance Support to DARPA Blackjack Space Mission. Published on 12/22/2025 at 06:25 am EST. S&P Capital IQ.Read more

fbodaily.com
fbodaily.com
SDA Tranche 2 (T2) Ground Management and Integration ...


Sep 14, 2024 — Initial ground architecture development, systems engineering and cross segment integration, and operations center and test infrastructure ...Read more

dodsoco.ogc.osd.mil
dodsoco.ogc.osd.mil
DOD Vendors with Contracts over $25000.00


... SYSTEMS, INC. 381 CONSTRUCTORS. 3C COMAN LTD. 3C TECHNICAL LLC. 3D BLOOMS, LLC ... SPACE SYSTEMS COMPANY. ABLE AEROSPACE SERVICES, INC. ABLE ELECTRONICS ...Read more

spacesecurity.wse.jhu.edu
spacesecurity.wse.jhu.edu
GAO Report on SCN Sustainment


Apr 12, 2023 — According to GAO, “Space Force is seeking additional SCN capability by exploring the use of commercial antennas and those operated by other ...Read more

smallsatnews.com
smallsatnews.com
GAO Report Warns of Technological and Schedule Risks ...


Jan 28, 2026 — The congressional watchdog warned that the Space Development Agency (SDA) is overestimating the technology readiness of critical elements within ...Read more

news.lockheedmartin.com
news.lockheedmartin.com
Lockheed Martin secures Tracking Layer contract from ...


Dec 19, 2025 — The award, with a potential value of over $1 billion, expands the Proliferated Warfighter Space Architecture with 18 new missile tracking ...Read more

Media - Lockheed Martin - Releases


LITTLETON, Colo., Sept. 1, 2020 – The Space Development Agency (SDA) awarded a Tranche 0 contract of the Space Transport Layer to Lockheed Martin (NYSE: ...Read more

cia.gov
cia.gov
FOIA CASE LOG 2018 3RD QTR


Aug 7, 2024 — ... JEHOVAH A.K.A. THE TETRAGRAM FILE UNREDACTED COPY OF SOVIET STAFF STUDY 01/03/1957, "THE SUEZ CRISIS - A TEST CASE FOR THE USSR'S MIDDLE 8 ...Read more

epub.stripes.com
epub.stripes.com
Ukraine abandons high-tech armaments rendered ineffective


May 28, 2024 — SLD 45, though, falls under a different field com- mand for the Space Force called. Space Systems Command. ... Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.Read more

irs.gov
irs.gov
4.19.6 Minister and Religious Waiver Program


A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. ... Jehovah's Witnesses in the United States. Jewish Congregations, Synagogues ...Read more

dokumen.pub
dokumen.pub
The RAF Eagle Squadrons : American Pilots Who Flew for ...


... Latter-Day Saints Civilian occupation: Student Marital status: Single ... Space Systems Command and Hanscom Field, Massachusetts, before retiring in ...Read more

theyworkforyou.com
theyworkforyou.com
Small Religious Organisations: Safeguarding: 2 Mar 2026


Mar 2, 2026 — I approach this issue as someone who grew up in a small religious organisation, the Jehovah's Witnesses, which IICSA recognised as having a ...Read more

docs.house.gov
docs.house.gov
The United States Department Of Defense And The ...


Nov 13, 2024 — Advanced Aerospace Weapon System Applications Program, SAM.gov, ... Jehovah in 1992 and at one time was called Zodiac. He claims the ...Read more

unispal.un.org
unispal.un.org
Cmd5479.pdf


... Jehovah into a highly spiritual mono-'? theism, and the embodiment of this faith and of the social ancl political ideals it inspired in immortal prose and ...Read more

qresear.ch
qresear.ch
QResear.ch - The 8chan/8kun QResearch Board Search


Space Systems Command Stands Up New Operational Testing & Training ... Latter-day Saints while he was a student. During that time, he married his high ...

QResear.ch - The 8chan/8kun QResearch Board Search


Justin Lee, Space Systems Command liaison to Space Forces Southern and U.S. Southern Command. ... Latter-day Saints. He returned to the platform two years ...

QResear.ch - The 8chan/8kun QResearch Board Search


... space-systems-command-funds-five-fight-tonight-solutions-to-pressing-ussf ... Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) involved with the Utah Territorial Militia ...

innoflight.com
innoflight.com
KEY PROVIDER TO DARPA'S BLACKJACK PIT BOSS ...


Feb 18, 2020 — Innoflight is pleased to announce its selection for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Blackjack Pit Boss program.Read more

globalsecurity.org
globalsecurity.org
Blackjack


Sep 9, 2024 — Blackjack is a DARPA program that will replace the old National Security Space (NSS) satellite infrastructure in GEO with a mesh grid operating ...Read more

ndupress.ndu.edu
ndupress.ndu.edu
PRISM Vol. 8, No. 3 - NDU Press


ABOUT. PRISM, the quarterly journal of complex operations published at National Defense. University (NDU), aims to illuminate and provoke debate on ...Read more

techcrunch.com
techcrunch.com
Securing space at speed


Lieutenant Colonel Tim Trimailo is the Materiel Leader, Commercially Augmented Space Inter-networked Operations (CASINO) program at Space Systems Command (SSC), ...Read more

za.investing.com
za.investing.com
Parsons wins $30 million contract for Blackjack space ...


Dec 22, 2025 — The new contract includes a novation that transfers a previously awarded $11 million contract from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ...Read more

wildphilanthropy.com
wildphilanthropy.com
Wild Philanthropy: Home


Wild Philanthropy is a charitable foundation designed to protect at-risk ecosystems and support vulnerable communities in Africa.Read more

dvrpc.org
dvrpc.org
Commute 95


Ongoing work to rebuild the pavement, bridges, and ramps along I-95 between Interstate 676 and Cottman Avenue means temporary delays for travelers.Read more

nj.gov
nj.gov
GOVERNOR'S BUDGET MESSAGE


We believe our current budget continues to conform to program requirements, and we are submitting it to GFOA to determine its eligibility for another award.Read more

ir.kratosdefense.com
ir.kratosdefense.com
Kratos Awarded $25 Million Task Order for U.S. Space Force's ...


Jun 11, 2025 — Kratos' primary business areas include virtualized ground systems for satellites and space vehicles including software for command & control.Read more

astrion.us
astrion.us
Axient, an Astrion Legacy Company, Selected for $237 ...


Other organizations selected for the STEP 2.0 contract include Blue Canyon Technologies, General Atomics, Lockheed Martin Corp., Loft Orbital Federal, Lynk ...

news.defcros.com
news.defcros.com
Space Force Selects 12 Vendors for Future Experiments ...


May 2, 2025 — The Space Force awarded 12 companies contracts for STEP 2.0, aiming to fast-track satellite-based technology demonstrations over ten years.

latercera.com
latercera.com
“Patagon Valley”: Amazon Web Services instalará ...


Feb 12, 2021 — En el sector de Cabo Negro, en la comuna de Punta Arenas, la multinacional pretende instalar, inicialmente, ocho estaciones terrestres ...Read more

dplnews.com
dplnews.com
AWS anuncia nueva Región de Infraestructura de Nube en ...


Amazon Web Services (AWS) anunció la apertura de una nueva Región de Infraestructura de Nube en Chile: estará disponible en 2026.Read more

maritimeinformed.com
maritimeinformed.com
KSAT deploys antennas at Svalbard and Punta Arenas ...


The multi-mission Tri-Band (X/S/Ka-band) antennas will further increase the KSAT Ka-Band capabilities, at the ground station in Svalbard, at 78´North and in ...Read more

marketplace.microsoft.com
marketplace.microsoft.com
KSAT Global Ground Station Network Services


The KSAT Global Ground Station Network provides you with access to your spacecraft. Anywhere, anytime - as a service. At a glance. https://store-images.s- ...Read more

pe.usembassy.gov
pe.usembassy.gov
Fact Sheet: Advancing the United States – Peru Partnership


Nov 15, 2024 — The Department of Defense will deliver a telescope to Peru in 2025 to detect space debris, building on the Space Situational Awareness agreement ...Read more

latamsatelital.com
latamsatelital.com
Telespazio Argentina obtiene contrato en Costa Rica


Mar 20, 2020 — Con este contrato, de un valor de 20 millones de dólares y una duración de 4 años, Telespazio Argentina refuerza su posición de liderazgo en ...

avionrevue.com
avionrevue.com
Telespazio Argentina obtiene un contrato en Costa Rica


Mar 19, 2020 — Según el contrato, Telespazio Argentina proporcionará servicios catastrales en el 50% de Costa Rica. El trabajo se realizará en un millón de ...

mx.advfn.com
mx.advfn.com
LDO - Leonardo Spa: contratto in Costa Rica per ...


Mar 19, 2020 — Con questo contratto, che ha un valore di 20 milioni di dollari e una durata di quattro anni, Telespazio Argentina diventa il leader in America ...

hoover.org
hoover.org
Space Safety and Sustainability, Part I


US Space Command, “USSPACECOM and Uruguayan Air Force Sign Space Situational Awareness. Information Sharing Agreement,” press release, April 9, 2024, https ...Read more

oecd.org
oecd.org
ARGENTINA: FOLLOW-UP TO THE PHASE 3bis REPORT ...


Feb 15, 2019 — In June 2019, Argentina presented a written follow-up report on its implementation of the recommendations from the 2017 Phase 3bis evaluation by ...

ungm.org
ungm.org
Annual Statistical Report 2000


The first annual statistical report on procurement by UN agencies in respect of operational activities, prepared by the Inter-Agency Procurement Services ...

Connector sources scanned

No connector sources scanned