Skip to content
NUFORC
Posts
Data Bank
Map
Gallery
File a UFO Report
Donate
About Us
Toggle website search
The National UFO Reporting Center Online Database

The NUFORC Databank is the largest independently collected set of UFO / UAP sighting reports available on the internet.   For 25 years, it has been the go-to resource for researchers and the general public interested in following the most recent first hand UFO witness accounts, or delving into a deep archive of historical reports.   The reports are freely available to the public to browse through the indexes below.   For any other use, including commercial use, please refer to our Terms of Service at the bottom of the page.

NUFORC staff review each report, and grade them as follows:

TIER 1: The most dramatic sightings – strange structured craft or highly anomalous phenomena seen at close distance.  Indicated by a bright yellow Open! Link.
TIER 2: Objects exhibiting unusual characteristics such as incredible speed, non-inertial turns, unexplainable propulsion, etc. Indicated by a faded yellow Open link.
TIER 3: Other reports that cannot be easily explained.
TIER 4: Reports we feel are explainable by human or natural phenomenon. Explanations are rated as Possible (indicated by ?), Probable or Certain.
Note: Reports received prior to March 2023 have not yet been graded.

Access reports from any of the lists below:

TIER 1 REPORTS
PILOT REPORTS
LATEST INVESTIGATIONS
ALL REPORTS

Index by EVENT DATE
Index by STATE/COUNTRY
Index by SHAPE OF UFO
Index by DATE POSTED

We hope that this information will prove to be useful to the general public and the UFO community at large.  We post  reports on a periodic basis as they are processed through our database.

The National UFO Reporting Center makes no claims as to the validity of the information in any of these reports.  Obvious hoaxes have been omitted, however most reports have been posted exactly as received in the author’s own wordO?

Audio Archive
In the early years of NUFORC, reports were primarily made over the telephone hotline, which was set up by NUFORC’s founder, Robert Gribble.   The Northern Ontario UFO Research and Study organization maintains an online archive of calls from 1974-1977, which can be accessed here.

Copyright 2026 National UFO Reporting Center, Davenport, WA      TERMS OF SERVICE     PRIVACY POLICY
