
1

Automatic Zoom
Signal Structure of the Starlink Ku-Band DownlinkTodd E. Humphreys∗, Peter A. Iannucci∗, Zacharias M. Komodromos†, Andrew M. Graff†
∗Department of Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics, The University of Texas at Austin†Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin
Abstract—We develop a technique for blind signal identifica-
tion of the Starlink downlink signal in the 10.7 to 12.7 GHz
band and present a detailed picture of the signal’s structure. Im-
portantly, the signal characterization offered herein includes the
exact values of synchronization sequences embedded in the signal
that can be exploited to produce pseudorange measurements.
Such an understanding of the signal is essential to emerging
efforts that seek to dual-purpose Starlink signals for positioning,
navigation, and timing, despite their being designed solely for
broadband Internet provision.
Index Terms—Starlink, signal identification, positioning, time
synchronization, low Earth orbit
I. INTRODUCTION
In addition to revolutionizing global communications,
recently-launched broadband low-Earth-orbit (LEO) mega-
constellations are poised to revolutionize global positioning,
navigation, and timing (PNT). Compared to traditional global
navigation satellite systems (GNSS), they offer higher power,
wider bandwidth, more rapid multipath decorrelation, and
the possibility of stronger authentication and zero-age-of-
ephemeris, all of which will enable greater accuracy and
greater resilience against jamming and spoofing [1]–[5].
With over 3000 satellites already in orbit, SpaceX’s Starlink
constellation enjoys the most mature deployment among LEO
broadband providers. Recent demonstrations of opportunistic
Doppler-based positioning with Starlink signals [6]–[8] open
up exciting possibilities. But whether Starlink signals are
more generally suitable for opportunistic PNT—not only via
Doppler positioning—and whether they could be the basis of a
full-fledged GNSS, as proposed in [5], remains an open ques-
tion whose answer depends on details of the broadcast signals,
including modulation, timing, and spectral characteristics. Yet
whereas the orbits, frequencies, polarization, and beam pat-
terns of Starlink satellites are a matter of public record through
the licensing databases of the U.S. Federal Communications
Commission [9], details on the signal waveform itself and
the timing capabilities of the hardware producing it are not
publicly available.
We offer two contributions to address this knowledge gap.
First, we develop a technique for blind signal identification
of the Starlink downlink signal in the 10.7 to 12.7 GHz
band. The technique is a significant expansion of existing
blind orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM)
signal identification methods (see [10]–[12] and the references
therein), which have only been successfully applied to simu-
lated signals. Insofar as we are aware, blind identification of
operational OFDM signals, including exact determination of
synchronization sequences, has not been achieved previously.
The technique applies not only to the Starlink Ku-band down-
link but generally to all OFDM signals except as regards some
steps required to estimate synchronization structures that are
likely unique to Starlink.
Second, we present a detailed characterization of the Star-
link downlink signal structure in the 10.7 to 12.7 GHz band.
This applies for the currently-transmitting Starlink satellites
(versions 0.9, 1.0, and 1.5), but will likely also apply for
version 2.0 and possibly later generations, given the need to
preserve backward compatibility for the existing user base.
Our signal characterization includes the exact values of syn-
chronization sequences embedded in the signal that can be
exploited to produce pseudorange measurements. Combining
multiple pseudorange measurements to achieve multi-laterated
PNT, as is standard in traditional GNSS, enables faster and
more accurate opportunistic position fixes than the Doppler-
based positioning explored in [6]–[8], [13]. and can addition-
ally offer nanosecond-accurate timing, whereas even under the
optimistic scenario envisioned in [13], extracting timing from
Doppler-based processing of LEO signals yields errors on the
order of 0.1 to 1 ms.
II. SIGNAL CAPTURE
To facilitate replication of our work, and as a prelude to
our presentation of the signal model, we begin with a detailed
description of our signal capture system.
One might reasonably wonder whether a standard consumer
Starlink user terminal (UT) could be modified to capture wide-
band (hundreds of MHz) raw signal samples for Starlink signal
identification. Not easily: operating the UT as development
hardware, which would permit capture of raw signal samples,
requires defeating security controls designed specifically to
prevent this. Moreover, the clock driving the UT’s downmixing
and sampling operations is of unknown quality and would
therefore taint any timing analysis of received signals.
We opted instead to develop our own system for Starlink
signal capture. Composed of off-the-shelf hardware and cus-
tom software, the system enables signal capture from one
Starlink satellite at a time with downmixing and sampling
referenced to a highly-stable GPS-disciplined oscillator.
Whereas the consumer Starlink UT operates as a phased
array of many separate antenna elements, our antenna is a
steerable 90-cm offset parabolic dish with a beamwidth of
approximately 3 degrees. Starlink orbital ephemerides pro-
vided publicly by SpaceX guide our selection and tracking
of overhead satellites. Only one or two Starlink satellites
illuminate a coverage cell at any one time with a data-bearing
beam [5]. To guarantee downlink activity, we solicit data by
Copyright © 2023 by Todd E. Humphreys, Peter A. Iannucci,
Zacharias M. Komodromos, and Andrew M. Graff
August 2023 version of paper published in TAES
downloading a high-definition video stream through a standard
Starlink UT co-located with our signal capture system.
Fig. 1 outlines our signal capture hardware and signal
pathways. A parabolic dish focuses signals onto a feedhorn
connected to a low-noise block (LNB) with a conversion gain
of 60 dB and a noise figure of 0.8 dB. The LNB is dual-
band, downconverting either 10.7–11.7 GHz (the lower band)
to 950–1950 MHz, or 11.7–12.75 GHz (the upper band) to
1100–2150 MHz. The antenna’s nominal gain is 40 dBi at
12.5 GHz, but there are losses of at least 4-5 dB due to lack
of a circular-to-linear polarizer and to feedhorn misalignment.
The signal capture system allows selection between narrow-
band (∼ 60 MHz) and wideband (∼ 1 GHz) signal capture
modes. For the narrowband mode, the output of the LNB is
fed to a transfer switch that diverts the signal through a tunable
bandpass filter for image rejection. Downstream hardware then
performs downmixing (consistent with the selected band),
additional bandpass filtering, and 16-bit complex sampling
at 62.5 Msps. The downmixing operation in the LNB and
the downmixing and sampling operations in the downstream
hardware are phase-locked to a common GPS-disciplined
oven-controlled crystal oscillator (OCXO) to minimize the
effects of receiver clock variations on the received signals.
A 3-TB data storage array permits archival of several hours
of continuous data.
Anti-alias filtering prior to sampling reduces the usable
bandwidth of the narrowband mode to approximately 60
MHz. Although this is much narrower than a single Star-
link channel, multiple overlapping captures can be combined
for a comprehensive analysis of all embedded narrowband
structures, as will be shown. However, the narrowband mode
cannot support a synoptic signal analysis. A second capture
mode—the wideband mode—addresses this deficiency. Based
on direct digital downconversion of 12-bit samples at 4096
Msps (real), the wideband mode is capable of alias-free
capture of the LNB’s entire lower band and most of its upper
band. The wideband mode’s limitations are storage, timing,
and noise figure: our current hardware permits only 1-second
segments of contiguous data to be captured before exhausting
the onboard memory, the sampling is not driven by the same
clock used for LNB downmixing (due to hardware limitations),
and the noise figure results in captured signals with a signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR) that is significantly worse than for the
narrowband mode.
For the analysis described subsequently, signal identifica-
tion was based on narrowband-mode-captured data except for
estimation of the primary synchronization sequence.
III. SIGNAL MODEL
Given its widespread use in wireless communications, one
might expect OFDM [14]–[18] to be the basis of the Ku-
band Starlink downlink. However, OFDM has historically been
avoided in satellite communications systems because its high
peak-to-average-power ratio leads to inefficient transmit power
conversion [19]. Nonetheless, inspection of the Starlink power
spectrum generated from captured data reveals spectrally-flat
frequency blocks with sharp edges, hallmarks consistent with
an OFDM hypothesis. Proceeding under the assumption of
an OFDM model, the problem of general signal identification
narrows to one of identifying the values of parameters fun-
damental to OFDM signaling. This section introduces such
parameters as it presents a generic OFDM signal model and
a received signal model.
A. Generic OFDM Signal Model
The serial data sequence carrying an OFDM signal’s infor-
mation is composed of complex-valued symbols drawn from
the set {Xmik ∈ C : m,i,k ∈ N, k < N, i < Nsf} at a
rate Fs, known as the channel bandwidth. The subscript k is
the symbol’s index within a length-N subsequence known as
an OFDM symbol, i is the OFDM symbol’s index within a
length-Nsf sequence of OFDM symbols known as a frame,
and m is the frame index. Each symbol Xmik encodes one
or more bits of information depending on the modulation
scheme (e.g., 1 for BPSK, 2 for 4QAM, 4 for 16QAM,
etc.), with higher-order modulation demanding higher SNR
to maintain reception at a given acceptably-low bit-error rate
(BER) [18]. OFDM is a highly spectrally efficient case of
multicarrier signaling in which each Xmik modulates one of N
mutually orthogonal subcarriers with overlapping spectra. Let
T = N/Fs be the interval over which N information symbols
arrive, and F = Fs/N = 1/T be the subcarrier spacing,
chosen as indicated to ensure subcarrier orthogonality over the
interval T. Then the baseband time domain signal produced
by the ith OFDM symbol of the mth frame is expressed over
0 ≤t < T as
x′mi(t) = 1√N
N−1∑
k=0
Xmik exp (j2πFtk) (1)
One recognizes this expression as an inverse discrete Fourier
transform, commonly implemented as an IFFT. Thus, one
can think of each Xmik as a complex-valued frequency-
domain coefficient. To prevent inter-symbol interference (ISI)
arising from channel multipath, OFDM prepends a cyclically-
extended guard interval of length Tg = Ng/Fs, called the
cyclic prefix, to each OFDM symbol. With the addition of
the cyclic prefix, the OFDM symbol interval becomes Tsym =
T + Tg, with T being the useful (non-cyclic) symbol interval.
Due to the time-cyclic nature of the IFFT, the prepending
operation can be modeled by a simple modification of (1)
over 0 ≤t < Tsym:
xmi(t) = 1√N
N−1∑
k=0
Xmik exp (j2πF(t −Tg)k) (2)
The function xmi(t) is called a time-domain OFDM symbol,
or simply an OFDM symbol when there is little risk of
confusion with its frequency-domain representation.
In all wireless OFDM protocols, subsequences of OFDM
symbols are packaged into groups variously called slots,
frames, or blocks. We will use the term frame to describe the
smallest grouping of OFDM symbols that is self-contained
in the sense that it includes one or more symbols with
predictable elements to enable receiver time and frequency
2
